The first thing that should be noted about analytic philosophy of technology is that there is not a more or less unified subfield of that name within philosophy with a consensus on a list of central problems and a canon of key writings, as is the case for (analytic) philosophy of science. It is only during the last four decades that analytic philosophers have turned to technology. Analytic philosophy of technology is, therefore, at best an emerging discipline, and it is still too early to be convinced that it will grow into a mature field comparable in extent to the philosophy of science. The contingencies of historical development play a large role in such matters.

Analytic philosophy is primarily a way of doing philosophy, or a view on what meaningful philosophy is about: what sorts of questions are worth asking and what sorts of answers to these questions are acceptable. Accordingly, it is defined by method, not by subject. Nevertheless, some subjects in philosophy are closer to the heart of analytic philosophy than others. What characterizes analytic philosophy is an abhorrence of systembuilding and speculation, a preference for a detailed treatment of clearly delineated problems, an emphasis on clear definitions of the concepts used to put a problem and to answer it, an emphasis on language, conceptualization and formalization, a general acknowledgment of the relevance of empirical facts, and a great respect ‘for the findings of science – to such an extent, even, that science and philosophy are considered to merge into each other or to form in some sense a continuum. Given this general outlook, questions concerning knowledge and theories have traditionally been at the centre of analytic philosophy, and for an analytic philosopher the philosophy of science is a respectable field of inquiry par excellence, though fields like metaphysics and ethics, which were regarded with extreme suspicion by the earliest analytic philosophers, have since been taken up to be studied from the analytic perspective. The following overview of some core issues in analytic philosophy of technology – the character of technological knowledge, the study of design and action, and the status of technical artifacts – will show that they are close to the heart of analytic philosophy.

The neglect that the philosophy of technology for a long time had in analytic philosophy may be attributed in part to a lack of reflection on the relation between science and technology – an attitude that is often presented, perhaps somewhat dramatized, in the form of a claim that technology is “merely” applied science. Indeed, a questioning of this relation was the central issue in the earliest discussions among analytic philosophers of technology. In 1966, in a special issue of the journal Technology and Culture, Henryk Skolimowski pointed out that technology is something quite different from science. Science concerns itself with what is, whereas technology concerns itself with what is to be. A few years later, in his well-known book The Sciences of the Artificial, Herbert Simon emphasized this important distinction in almost the same words, stating that the scientist is concerned with how things are but the engineer with how things ought to be. Although it is difficult to imagine that earlier analytic philosophers, in particular the logical empiricists, were blind to this difference in orientation, their inclination to view knowledge primarily as a system of statements may have led to a conviction that in technology no knowledge claims play a role that cannot also be found in science, and that therefore the study of technology poses no new challenges and holds no surprises regarding the interests of analytic philosophy. Additionally it must be noted that a close relationship between scientists and philosophers had grown around several foundational issues – the reality of atoms, the status of causality and probability, questions of space and time, the nature of the quantum world – that were so lively discussed during the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century. No such intimacy existed between those same philosophers and technicians; their worlds barely touched. And as the saying goes: unknown, unloved.

In the same issue of Technology and Culture, Mario Bunge defended the view that technology is applied science, but in a subtle way that does justice to the differences between science and technology. Bunge acknowledges that technology is about action, but an action heavily underpinned by theory – that is what distinguishes technology from the arts and crafts and puts it on a par with science. According to Bunge, theories in technology come in two types: substantive theories, which provide knowledge about the object of action, and operative theories, which are concerned with action itself. The substantive theories of technology are indeed largely applications of scientific theories. The operative theories, in contrast, are not preceded by scientific theories but are born in applied research itself. Still, as Bunge claims, operative theories show a dependency on science in that in such theories the method of science is employed. This includes such features as modeling and idealization, the use of theoretical concepts and abstractions, and the modification of theories by the absorption of empirical data through predictions and retrodictions.

In his comment on Skolimowski’s paper in Technology and Culture, Ian Jarvie proposed as important questions for an analytic philosophy of technology, what the epistemological status of technological statements is and how technological statements are to be demarcated from scientific statements. This suggests a thorough investigation of the various forms of knowledge occurring in either practice. A distinction between “knowing that” – traditional propositional knowledge – and “knowing how” – non-articulated and even impossible-to-articulate knowledge – had earlier been introduced by Gilbert Ryle, one of the most important British analytic philosophers of the mid-twentieth century, but this distinction was not used to investigate the epistemological status of technological claims. Whether it would have been fruitful in this respect is still an open question. Not much progress seems to have been made in philosophy in this respect. These early analytic philosophers of technology still shared the philosophy of science as point of departure. As a result, they tended to miss an important, if not the most important, activity that sets technology apart from science, that of design. To understand this part of technology properly, a thorough acquaintance with engineering practice is required.

In his 1990 book What Engineers Know and How They Know It, the aeronautical engineer Walter Vincenti gave a sixfold categorization of engineering design knowledge (leaving aside production and operation as the other two basic constituents of engineering practice). Vincenti distinguishes (1) fundamental design concepts, including primarily the operational principle and the normal configuration of a particular device; (2) criteria and specifications; (3) theoretical tools; (4) quantitative data; (5) practical considerations; and (6) design instrumentalities. The third and fourth category can be assumed to include Bunge’s substantive technological theories. Of the remaining four categories, Vincenti claims that they represent prescriptive forms of knowledge rather than descriptive ones. Here, the activity of design introduces an element of normativity, which fails in scientific knowledge. Take such a basic notion as “operational principle,” by which is meant the way in which the function of a device is realized – how it works, in short. This is still a purely descriptive notion. Subsequently, however, it plays a role in arguments that seek to prescribe a course of action to someone who has a goal that could be realized by the operation of such a device. At this stage, the issue changes from a descriptive to a prescriptive or normative one. In analytic philosophy, such arguments are studied under the headings of practical inference, instrumental rationality and means – ends reasoning. A lot of work still has to be done on the precise ways technological action, as included in the activity of designing, is linked to the study that these fields present of action in general.

This task requires a clear view on the extent and scope of technology. If we follow Joseph Pitt in his 1999 book Thinking about Technology and define technology broadly as “humanity at work,” then to distinguish between technological action and action in general becomes difficult, and the study of technological action must absorb all descriptive and normative theories of action, including the theory of practical rationality, and much of theoretical economics in its wake. There have indeed been attempts within analytic philosophy at such an encompassing account of human action, for example Tadeusz Kotarbiñski’s Praxiology (1955), but a perspective of such generality makes it difficult to arrive at results of sufficient depth. It is a challenge for analytic philosophy in general to specify the differences among action forms and the reasoning grounding them in, to single out three prominent practices, technology, organization and management, and economics.

Another issue of central concern to analytic philosophers of technology is the status of artifacts. Philosophy of science has emphasized that the concept of natural kind, such as exemplified by “water” or “atom,” lies at the basis of science. In technology, artifacts are similarly represented as forming kinds, but such kinds – in particular functional kinds like “knife” or “aeroplane” – lack the property that makes them so important in science, that of supporting natural laws. There are no regularities that all knives or all aeroplanes answer to. In fact the character itself of a functional kind is unclear: is a knife everything that can be used to cut, or everything that was made with the intention that it be used for cutting? The former would classify splinters of glass and sharp rocks as knives; the latter would have us include in the class of knives all failed attempts at designing a knife and all remnants of knives worn beyond recognition. Neither alternative is attractive. This broad concept of functional kind is, however, not the only relevant notion of a kind in technology, nor the most important one. It can be argued that engineering design is aimed at creating a kind or type rather than one or several individual artifacts. Since these kinds are specified in terms of physical and geometrical parameters, they are much closer to the natural kinds of science, in that they support law-like regularities.

The contrast between these two sorts of kinds reflects the more general problem of the relation between structure and function in technical artifacts. Structure and function mutually constrain each other, but the constraining is only partial, and it is therefore unclear whether a general account of this relation is possible. In relation to this it is equally problematic whether a unified account of the notion of function as such is possible. This notion is of paramount importance for an understanding of artifacts. An artifact’s function is, roughly, what it is for, where it is open whether this for-ness is based ultimately on what the artifact is designed for or being used for. Several researchers have emphasized that an adequate description of artifacts must refer both to their status as tangible physical objects and to the intentions of their users and designers. Peter Kroes and Anthonie Meijers (2006) have dubbed this view “the dual nature of technical artifacts.” They suggest that the two aspects are “tied up,” so to speak, in the notion of artifact function. Function, however, is also a key concept in biology, where no intentionality plays a role. Up till now there is no accepted general account of function under which both the intentionality-oriented notion of artifact function and the non-intentional notion of biological function – not to speak of other areas where the concept plays a role, such as the social sciences – can be subsumed. The collection of essays edited by Ariew, Cummins and Perlman (2002) presents a recent introduction to this topic.

This presentation of some of the core issues addressed by analytic philosophers of technology might suggest that they are not interested in ethical and social problems in connection with technology, just as the ethical and social dimensions of science are almost completely ignored in analytic philosophy of science. This is not so, however, but their interest is triggered more by the engagement of analytic philosophers of technology in engineering practice than by the interests of philosophical ethics. Analytic ethics is primarily a form of meta-ethics, that is, it discusses the character of ethical judgments and ethical statements and the way these are related, through rules of inference, for instance, with other types of statements. It is not apparent that technology presents special challenges to meta-ethics – none, at least, that do not already occur within the philosophy of action and the theory of rationality. Rather, analytic philosophers of technology share in a broadly felt conviction that any form of philosophical reflection on technology must address the ethical and societal problems raised by technology. The way they address these problems reflects the general orientation of analytic philosophy. In line with the central place they give to conceptual analysis, analytical philosophers stress the importance of clarifying key notions like responsibility. And, in line with their urge to take the empirical facts into account, they argue that a thorough acquaintance with the way engineering design is organized and the way technical artifacts are implemented and used is crucial to an understanding of the way in which ethical problems related to technology emerge, an understanding that must precede any sensible proposal to deal with such problems. Similarly, with regard to the sweeping claims concerning the meaning of technology in human culture and the good or bad ways in which it shapes human life that can so readily be found in traditional philosophy of technology, analytic philosophers of technology point to the need to analyze and make more precise concepts like man, mankind, culture, thought, freedom, and the like, before such statements can be meaningfully proposed and discussed.

References
Ariew, A., Cummins, R. and Perlman, M. (eds) (2002). Functions: New Essays in the Philosophy of Psychology and Biology (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Kotarbiński, T. (1955). Traktat o dobrej robocie, English translation (1965), Praxiology: An Introduction to the Sciences of Efficient Action (Oxford: Pergamon Press).
Kroes, P. A. and Meijers, A. W. M. (eds) (2006), “The Dual Nature of Technical Artefacts,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 37 (special issue): 1–158.
Mitcham, C. (1994). Thinking through Technology: The Path between Engineering and Philosophy (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
Pitt, J. C. (1999). Thinking about Technology: Foundations of the Philosophy of Technology (New York: Seven Bridges Press).
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson).
Simon, H. A. (1969). The Sciences of the Artificial (Cambridge, Mass./London: MIT Press).
Vincenti, W. G. (1991). What Engineers Know and How They Know It: Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History (Baltimore, Md./London: Johns Hopkins University Press).