# Introduction

use of reason and then apply what we learn to subdue and/or dominate it. (“From knowledge comes prevision; from prevision comes action,” says the thoroughly optimistic Comte.) Here the key concepts of modern philosophy function positively. As Tiles and Oberdiek explain, behind the optimistic vision lies a pair of (Cartesian) dichotomies – facts vs. values, and nature vs. humans. Being rational and exercising autonomy manifest our essence. Reason (in the form of science) reveals nature in its factual reality. Value is given to the whole process by our decisions concerning what we want. And given this cluster of philosophical root concepts, technology is the process of applying science in order to get what we value. And the whole process is working.

Technological pessimism – exemplified here especially by Ellul (see Chapter 36) – gets its plausibility precisely from all the ways in which this process of fulfilling our destiny seems disastrous. The whole instrumentalist, technoscientific process is supposed to be a rational and orderly affair with chosen and predictable outcomes, but in the social world in which it plays itself out, the effects of this process are often unexpected, frequently unfair or destructive, and yet all too often apparently inevitable. The authors put the point starkly: the optimistic picture of ever greater control of nature through technology “contains within it the seeds of social paranoia.” For example, there is the apparent necessity of undemocratic means for controlling complex technological practices, the deskilling of these practices for greater efficiency, the undesigned and undesired consequences of the use of even seemingly innocent technologies (for example, with antibiotics come super-germs, with IT for everyone come government dossiers on everyone) – all of this “progress” seems to point quite generally to technology’s taking on an unpleasant and unmanageable life of its own. Technological systems behave, say Tiles and Oberdiek, like ecosystems. Try to control any part of the system, and the unexpected happens somewhere else.

Nevertheless, the authors argue that the pessimistic vision, too, is overdrawn, and just as with technological optimism, its tendencies to excess can be traced to its dependence on the inadequate vocabulary of modern philosophy. If one’s basic notion of freedom is “autonomy,” then our ability to control events will always seem, wrongly, to be either total or nonexistent. If rationality is defined instrumentally, then the default position on appropriate goals will always be the efficient realization of whatever those with the most power/knowledge want (see, e.g., Foucault, Chapter 54). And if reality is understood as whatever can be known and used, then the very distinction between the human and the nonhuman – and thus the foundational distinction between natural causation and free valuation implied by the dualisms of modern philosophy – becomes difficult to sustain (as Pickering and Latour in this section, and Bostrom, Chapter 43, conclude). Tiles and Oberdiek suggest that what is needed is a philosophical (and non-Cartesian?) “middle ground” that would allow us to avoid the extremes of both technological optimism and pessimism. As other readings in this anthology show, variations of technological optimism or pessimism, as well as perspectives that share the authors’ sense that a third approach is possible – one that puts greater emphasis on what it means for us to start our inquiries already situated “in the midst” of technological culture – are all represented in recent science and technology studies.

Andrew Pickering and Bruno Latour might both be usefully interpreted as taking Tiles and Oberdiek’s critique of modern philosophy seriously. Thus, Pickering approaches both science and technology in an explicitly non-traditional way, urging that we first think of them as practices in which we are materially and intellectually submerged. In this, he sees himself as necessarily offering a new ontology – what he calls a “decentered ontology of becoming.” Traditional philosophers of science (and those philosophies of technology that still model themselves after it – e.g., Franssen, Chapter 18) typically focus on questions about what knowledge is, how it is obtained and justified, and perhaps its ethical use, and then label all other questions “merely” humanistic, historical, political, or social-scientific. Pickering labels this constrictive approach “representational,” meaning that its understanding of science (and technology) constitutes a kind of anthropocentric idealism in which disembodied intellects are depicted as observing what lies factually before them and attempting to represent in theories (and techniques) the objective reality that these facts allegedly disclose. Pickering rejects the realist and objectivist metaphysics of a fully determinate pre-existing world that animates such philosophy. Of course, representation is one thing science does, but this is no justification for forcing all descriptions of technoscientific life into this Cartesian frame. The basic condition of the world, he says, is one of action or “performance,” not knowing; hence, the fundamental categories of philosophy should be temporality, process, and emergence – categories adequate to illuminating the constant interaction of humans and machines, that endless struggle of accommodation and adjustment which Pickering often calls “the dance of agency.” This is our world in its always thoroughly performative condition – a “mangle of practice” in which our dualistic conception of rational and autonomous human selves vs. knowable and usable material objects is a very late (and exaggerated) construction.

Pickering’s “mangle” – expanded metaphorically from the British word for “wringer” – began as (and certainly to some extent remains) a relatively inchoate notion through which he intends to stress the influence of both the role of material objects and the situatedness of scientists in social interactions, not only within the scientific community itself but also in society more generally. The idea, he says, “conjures up the image of the unpredictable transformations worked upon whatever gets fed into the old-fashioned device … used to squeeze water out of washing.” Scientists are of course part of the mangle, contending not only with the difficulties and resistances presented by material objects but also with the need to interact with other scientists and social institutions. Pickering sometimes calls the mangle a dialectic process, but one with no overarching trajectory or final goal, either in the sense of a fulfillment of history or the total comprehension of absolute reality. Even the idea of what is possible is forever revised in the ongoing process human–nonhuman intertwining.

Given the evident process-like character of technoscientific life, Pickering also objects to the traditional representative picture of the over-fixity of everything. Of course, motion and material alteration are acknowledged, but only within the parameters of a universe still basically understood in accordance with the static metaphors of nineteenth-century physics, “with its repertoire of enduring causes and constraints.” Hence, a central feature of the mangle idea is its stress on “emergence.” Instead of looking for what can only be thought in “synchronic, non-temporal” terms, philosophies of science and technology should look for processes and transformations; and even the conceptual models we employ to grasp the world and its “brute contingencies” should be treated as something forever reworked in the dance of accommodation and adjustment.

A corollary to Pickering’s new focus on process is his call for us also rethink the rigid traditional distinction between human and nonhuman. He does not go so far as attributing anthropocentrically describable agency directly to non-living objects (as Latour and Callon do). Yet he also does not wish to deny them agency altogether. Here, he draws on the notion of forces or powers in nature worked out by John Locke in the eighteenth century and again by Rom Harré in the twentieth century. With their help, he conceives of his approach as an alternative to Hume’s heretofore more influential treatment of the material world in terms of separate, presented events. Ironically, in construing the natural powers of inanimate objects as a kind of agency, Pickering consistently employs the anthropomorphic term “agency,” not a more neutral term like Latour’s “actants.” In any case, by adopting a “performative idiom” for philosophy, Pickering sees himself as moving “into a posthumanist space … in which human actors are still there but now inextricably entangled with the nonhuman, no longer the center of the action and calling the shots.”

Pickering’s approach might usefully be compared with Dewey’s pragmatism – at least in its “experimental” character, if not so obviously with Dewey’s instrumentalism – insofar as his temporalizing of the scientific and technological process leads him to conceive of the interplay between inquiry, material involvement, and feedback as involving a constant tinkering or “tuning.” As Hickman suggests (see Chapter 34), in later works Dewey often uses “technology” as a virtual synonym for “inquiry.” Pickering also claims some kinship with Heidegger, but it is not clear that he understands Heidegger well enough to explain this in any detail. Granted that he thinks of himself as defending an “ontology” of becoming, there is nothing Heideggerian about his regarding this as a political move. Pickering’s overall conception of global technology is not “dystopian”; and the radical changes he thinks might be made in our normative conceptions of material and social life – that is when we begin to think of ourselves more self-consciously as “in the flow of becoming” rather than as on the outside trying to control it – certainly bear no relation to Heidegger’s disastrous political ruminations in the 1930s.

Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker defend a straightforwardly social constructionist view of technology. As the selections from Pickering and Latour show, this outlook has become extremely influential in science and technology studies, even among those who do not fully embrace it. Social constructionism first emerged in postpositivistic studies of science, where the logical empiricists’ formal and purely rational conceptions of scientific procedure (see Part II, Section 1) were recontextualized to show that science is best understood as a human practice – one in which defining and evaluating data, making discoveries, and giving explanations are all “negotiations” among real persons and social groups. Social constructionists insist on remaining neutral with regard to the truth-status of scientific claims. They evoke a “principle of symmetry” with regard to all competing claims (a move criticized by Winner, Chapter 55), in order to focus on understanding them, rather than judging them as superior or inferior from a privileged external vantage point. However, this symmetry or neutrality has been interpreted in two very different ways. Some interpret it to be a methodological stance of “bracketing,” in which science as a sociocultural practice is simply studied without the need to take a stand on the objectivity of its results or the reality of its subject matter. However, others regard social constructionist neutrality as a substantive position, an ontological and not merely a methodological stance, so that the so-called facts and objects of science must all be construed as being nothing more than socially constructed and thus not “real” in the sense of present in an objective world, independently of humans, and hopefully capable of “proper” representation. Especially this second, substantive construal of neutrality has been strongly contested, both for its apparently anti-realist conception of science and for focusing too exclusively on the production of scientific facts, objects, and claims, and too little on their social impact. In general, the principal objection to social constructivism is that it shares the weaknesses of all pluralistic approaches to social studies of science and technology – a weakness that becomes philosophically dangerous when pluralism is conceived substantively instead of methodologically. If the various groups of inventors, consumers, and persons in government and business are all equally regarded as participants in the negotiations over scientific and technological policy, the inevitable tendency is to ignore the extent to which more powerful groups and interests may call the tune and to neglect what is not “visible” in the negotiations – for example, who and what are effectively excluded, subordinated, or harmed by the process as it is guided in accordance with the dominant orientations and attitudes of the more visible participants. Indeed, from a deliberately adopted value-neutral perspective, normative questions about the problematic sociopolitical character of the modern technoscientific orientation cannot even arise.

Social constructionist accounts of technology now duplicate the pattern of study worked out earlier in connection with social studies of science, again typically drawing special attention to actual processes of invention and interaction. Holistic characterizations of technology by thinkers like Heidegger, Ellul, Marcuse, and Mumford are all rejected for wrongly inclining us to think of it in extra-empirical, deterministic terms, or to picture it as autonomous or out of control. Instead the focus is turned to examining the fine structure of particular technologies, together with the groups of inventors and consumers involved with these technologies. In this way, one arrives at a picture of both the social negotiations that, say, determine the final form of an artifact and also the social consensus that accepts it as a desired product.

Bruno Latour’s actor-network theory (ANT), also associated with the work of Michael Callon and John Law, has become an especially influential and radicalized form of social constructivism. In this recent defense of the theory (from Reassembling the Social, 2005), Latour reiterates his famous denial of the existence of “society,” as we usually understand this notion, but he explains his rejection more clearly and explicitly than in earlier works like Laboratory Life (1979, with Steve Woolgar) or Science in Action (1987). In traditional social science and common sense, he notes, one typically thinks of social wholes (e.g., religions, political parties, markets, societies) as something human beings act in and belong to, that is, precisely as somethings, special kinds of real entities, organized according to a plan or implicit logic in terms of which we cognize and use material objects. For Latour, however, there is a glaringly abstract and anthropomorphic cast to this whole pattern of understanding. Even in the simplest tasks and most rudimentary organizations, every entity takes shape by virtue of its relations with everything else; so, too, with complex macro-level phenomena like science, nature, society; and so, too, with the whole process. Everything comes to be what it is (i.e., semiotically speaking, “mean” what it means) in and during the interactions and associations through which a whole is constituted. Conversely, the whole just is this continuously constituting process. Hence ANT, unlike what Latour perceives to be the traditional social scientific “default position” – in which social wholes are treated as if they were “separate domains” whose “structures” researchers represent in their theories – conceives these wholes as interactive “networks” – that is, heterogeneous combinations or amalgamations of textual, conceptual, social, material, and technical “actants,” only some of which are human. In this way, Latour extends Bloor’s “principle of symmetry” from neutrality concerning true vs. false claims to neutrality about humans vs. objects, calling them both “volitional actors,” that is, any agent, collective or individual, that can associate with or dissociate from other agents. Actants enter into networked associations, which in turn define them, name them, and provide them with substance, intention, and subjectivity. Here, we can hear echoes of the older “systems approach” to technology, which followed the engineer’s modeling of power and communication systems (indeed, one older historian from this period, Thomas P. Hughes, now explicitly embraces ANT as systems theory’s replacement). There is also something strikingly Leibnizian in ANT’s use of “monadic” imagery to characterize actants; but for Latour himself (as he has lately come to explain), actants are more like Whitehead’s “actual occasions” – that is, foundationally indeterminate and momentary events/entities, with no a priori substance or essence, and always in the process of acquiring and modifying the natures they receive in their networks’ “movement of re-association and reassembling.” For Latour as for Whitehead, “societies” include all sorts of relational complexes, chemical-molecular, organic, linguistic, economic, and cosmological; moreover, there is no privileged external position from which these complexes are “objectively” understood.

Latour contrasts his own view especially with the French sociologist Émile Durkheim, for whom social facts and social laws are irreducible to the facts of individual behavior and psychological laws about this behavior. (Comte, as Durkheim’s foremost predecessor, even denied that “psychology” would ever achieve scientific status.) Latour turns to the much less influential French social thinker Gabriel Tarde, Durkheim’s contemporary and opponent, who completely rejected Durkheim’s institutionalist and anti-reductionist outlook. Indeed, especially in light of Latour’s influence on Continental philosophy of technology, it is interesting to ponder the similarities between his deconstruction of sociology and the logical positivists’ attack on the holism implicit in Gestalt psychology’s use of the logic of relations.

In any case, part of Latour’s aim in focusing on individual actants is to discredit the idea that there are any “hidden social forces” (e.g., unconscious motives or inherited and determinative traditions). He is unsympathetic to the idea that actors are not fully aware of what they are doing. The aim is to treat everything as on the surface and self-evident, and to interpret the complexities of social life entirely in terms of the struggles and resolutions worked out by actants themselves. In this respect his approach resembles the ethnomethodology of Harold Garfinkel (whom Latour cites as displaying similarities to Tarde).

It is not hard to understand why so many have found Latour’s theory attractive, at least initially. What we might call his promotion of a new ontology by fiat seems to promise that one might sidestep with one move all the old epistemic controversies in traditional philosophy of science, blow away the stale air of mainstream structuralism (and structural-functionalism), and force a more careful turn in social science toward detailed research into the actual intricacies of a technoscientific life, where rigid distinctions between human vs. machine, science vs. technology, and authoritative viewpoint vs. mere opinion just seem out of place. ANT has encouraged many philosophers of technology to take the so-called “empirical turn,” in which one rejects the older speculations about Technology Überhaupt and emphasizes the careful study of actual “material relations” with our technoscientific surroundings (e.g., Verbeek, Chapter 47, traces his own postphenomenological exploration of the “morality of things” to ANT).

However, ANT has also understandably come to be widely and passionately disputed – so much so that Latour famously quipped that perhaps he should “abandon what was wrong with ANT, that is, ‘actor,’ ‘network,’ ‘theory,’ without forgetting the hyphen.” Of course, he did not do this; yet even with his subsequent clarifications and modifications, deeply problematic ontological, epistemological, and political issues remain. Some of the first two sorts of issues are discussed in the selection from Sismondo. But it is useful to note briefly some political issues as well. As Latour acknowledges, ANT explicitly and deliberately embraces a species of methodological individualism for social science. His theory was born in the 1980s, when the orthodox social scientific emphasis on institutions, large-scale organizations, and social movements faced both internal and external public opposition. From within science came the rise of mathematically modeled micro-research in economics, sociobiology, evolutionary biology, and even history, as well as numerous postpositivist and poststructuralist critiques of the standard accounts of scientific practice. From the wider world came the post-World War II wave of neoliberal, libertarian, individualist, and even anarchist political and economic reactions to collective/institutional social life. Holistic phenomena like “culture,” “society,” and “social structure” thus seemed as problematic to scientific researchers as “social justice,” “class,” and “welfare state” did to entrepreneurs, technocrats, and other “freedom” lovers. In this atmosphere, as Latour himself acknowledges, all the central tenets of his own scientific orientation – its neutrality regarding human vs. nonhuman, its rejection of external standards of objectivity or value, its “follow the actors” preference for the most visible and dominant actants – echo and articulate the characteristics of a certain political stance as well. It is of course easy to make too much of the fact that Latour’s work is published in a series devoted to corporate management, or that he himself quotes favorably Margaret Thatcher’s crudely unfeeling “There is no such thing as society, only individuals and families,” but it would certainly have been useful if he had explained in what sense(s) he thinks she meant this “very differently.” His silence is often held against him, not because critics are eager to label him a Thatcherite, but because it is difficult to see precisely how his generalized principle of symmetry, which denies the (political as well as epistemic) relevance of theoretical terms describing anything more than entities or processes, could ever encourage anything more than a mere “understanding” of all the networks in our present world which happen to have achieved sufficient stability to be designated “societies” through the “inscription” of the dominant sentiments of the rich and powerful.

In his critical assessment of ANT, Sergio Sismondo follows John Law in characterizing the theory as “relational materialism.” What it means to call it “relational” seems clear. We can trace this approach to reality and to society back to Hegel and Marx, and thus view ANT as part of the twentieth century’s intellectual shift away from the earlier philosophical emphasis on properties or qualities – a movement that stretches all the way from William James’ perception of relations; to the extension of Aristotle’s logic of properties to a logic of relations by Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, Charles S. Peirce, and other mathematical logicians; to relativity theorists’ and logical positivists’ production of a relational theory of space/time; to (most importantly in connection with Latour himself) Alfred North Whitehead’s development of a full-blown metaphysics of relations (who even claimed in conversations that subject–predicate logic was the source of modern immorality!). Whitehead has experienced a surprising revival among science studies postmodernists. In the 1920s and 1930s his influence was confined mainly to philosophical theologians (e.g., Charles Hartshorne), and he otherwise remained without a following until such figures as Latour, Pickering, and Donna Haraway all began to praise Whitehead’s relational panpsychism as an anticipation of their own views.

The sense in which ANT can be called a “materialism,” however, is more problematic – especially given the acknowledged influence of Whitehead. Latour, of course, is no Whiteheadian, insofar as he attributes agency not only to nonhuman organisms but to non-living artifacts such as machines and chemicals. But it is possible that Sismondo and Law are thinking of something more like Marx’s historical materialism or the cultural materialism of neo-Marxists like Raymond Williams, who both opposed the “mechanical materialism” of Enlightenment materialists such as Thomas Hobbes, Baron d’Holdbach, and Jules la Mettrie. This suggestion gets some support from the fact that recent postphenomenological philosophers of technology like Don Idhe and Peter-Paul Verbeek (Chapters 46 and 47) often explain their “empirical turn” away from the older speculative and dystopian views of Mumford, Ellul, and Heidegger as amounting to a new emphasis on “materiality” – by which they mean that postphenomenology attends primarily to giving careful accounts of “concrete” personal, interpersonal, and social relations with actual technologies (in the plural).

Sismondo concludes with brief summaries of four problem areas for ANT. First, there is the high price it seems required to pay for generalizing the principle of symmetry. Critics argue that ANT’s treatment of cultures and cultural networks seems especially weak. For example, such phenomena as the “style” of activities in a particular workplace, or the role of trust in a complex practice, seem distinctively “human” all the way down. Indeed, even “strictly rational” choices are actually made and play out in culturally distinctive ways. Unfortunately, says Sismondo, “the world of ANT is culturally flat.” Second, there is ANT’s notorious difficulty with the notion of agency, in apparently both overemphasizing the roles of choice and explicit planning in the functioning of social wholes, and failing to do full justice to the phenomenon of “acting” itself when the actants involved are human. Like the behaviorists’ accounts before them, ANT’s descriptions of what people are and do – developed without making any reference to “subjective” unobservables like intentionality – simply fail to be convincing (and have, moreover, disturbing political lacunae concerning moral responsibility). Third, however epistemologically appealing it may initially seem to sidestep centuries of obscure and probably insoluble problems such as whether there is “really” a world out there, it is difficult to ignore the virtually universal sense among (to name just the two most obvious groups) scientists and engineers that some of their claims actually, in a strong sense, get things right. Besides, Latour’s own insistence on the existence of nonhuman entities seems to commit him to some sort of realism in spite of himself. Hence, Sismondo identifies other thinkers with strong constructivist leanings (e.g., Pickering) who have faced this question more directly, and he rubs Latour’s nose in the problem by quoting his disconcertingly offhand admission that “A little bit of constructivism takes you far away from realism; a complete constructivism brings you back to it.” Finally, Sismondo identifies a cluster of issues regarding the “stability” of networks that still await satisfactory treatment by ANT. The problem seems particularly acute in the case of larger wholes like societies, and complex practices like an interdisciplinary scientific research project, where following well-established or even formalized rules seems necessary to the very existence of a relatively stable “network.” There appears to be no room in ANT for something like Wittgenstein’s account of how “following a rule” is an interpretive process, and Latour’s notions of tinkering, observing, and manipulating seem essentially inadequate to the task.

---
*Source: Philosophy of Technology: The Technological Condition: An Anthology, Second Edition. Edited by Robert C. Scharff and Val Dusek. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.*
---