# Introduction

At first glance, it may seem surprising that until recently, philosophers have not devoted much time to the question of technology. One might have thought that greater attention would at least have come to be paid to this phenomenon in the modern period when advances in natural and biological science increasingly and obviously made technology a central and dominant feature of society and culture. Yet the fact is that even today – in the North American and British mainstream of analytic philosophy and to a lesser extent among those influenced by late nineteenth- and twentieth-century postpositivist and Continental European sources – the philosophy of technology is still widely regarded as not much more than a small and not particularly prestigious area of specialization.

In part, the reasons for this secondary status for the philosophy of technology are reflected in the general features of modern intellectual history. In the Anglo-American empiricist, French Enlightenment, and European positivist traditions, technology is widely depicted as an unproblematically beneficial force for human progress. For these traditions, technology needs only the proper association with modern science to fulfill its promise; hence the genuinely philosophical issues lie primarily in the epistemology of science, which explains how genuine knowledge is to be obtained, and in ethics, which determines what that knowledge is for. With epistemology and ethics thus focused on the two central issues of what we can know and what we should do, technology falls through the cracks, understood as just the relatively neutral means for employing scientific knowledge to bring about the ideal relations in the natural and social world that ethical decisions prescribe.

It is true that for the Romantic and post-Hegelian “Continental” traditions, this judgment must be qualified slightly, for in these traditions there is less inclination to conceive all knowledge according to the model of science or to conceive of science as an essentially progressive force. Yet science itself (especially natural science) is just as often viewed by them also in strictly instrumentalist terms, and technology is widely understood as simply applied science – with the difference being that the cultural implications of all this are more likely to be conceived in critical and pessimistic terms, not in the progressive or even utopian terms characteristic of the empiricist and positivist traditions.

To fully understand the philosophical neglect of technology, however, one must go back to ancient Greek thought and to the manner in which figures like Plato and Aristotle drew their distinctions between theoretical and practical understanding. There is no question, of course, that the ancients took the distinction seriously. It is known, for instance, that Plato’s teacher, Socrates (c.470–399 bce), often discussed this distinction. He insisted that the “craft” knowledge of farmers, shoemakers, and bakers, as well as physicians, is genuine knowledge. Socrates’ point, however, is one of criticism rather than defense. Craft knowledge consists primarily in a kind of technical understanding, limited to its concern with the pursuit of particular trades or practices. Unfortunately, those who possess such knowledge (and especially those who achieve worldly success because of it) are often misled into thinking they possess wisdom about life in general. Socrates is thus at pains to argue that practically oriented craft knowledge is in fact quite different from the knowledge of the good life that has always been the concern of the religious seers and poets. Plato (c.429–c.347 bce), too, employs this general Socratic distinction of craft knowledge vs. knowledge of life; moreover, his dialogues are full of images of actual technological devices. The water clock, the astronomical orrery, and the mechanical puppet show all figure prominently as metaphors and models for several of his myths – for example, of cosmic creation in the Timaeus, the last judgment in the Republic, the history of the cosmos in the Statesman, and the shadow play of puppet-objects in the myth of the cave in the Republic’s account of the triumph of reason over sensual experience in genuine philosophical learning.

What Plato also makes explicit, however, is that the Socratic distinction between technical or craft knowledge, on the one hand, and knowledge of the good life, on the other, is fundamentally a distinction between two unequal phenomena. Craft knowledge is ordinary, lower, sense-experientially based understanding focused on practical affairs. Knowledge of the good life and of the ultimate nature of things – that is, the “wisdom” that philosophers “love” – is a higher, theoretical, and genuinely rational knowledge to which the former kind of knowledge is rightfully and ultimately beholden. Thus, for example, in the Republic, Plato envisions the education of the philosopher king as involving extensive training in pure mathematics (including theoretical astronomy and music theory) as the proper background for further and still higher training in philosophical dialectics. And in the Gorgias he shows how technical understanding (e.g., of rhetoric) is useless, or worse, when cut off from the deeper knowledge of what rhetoric is truly “good” for.

It is this higher, genuinely rational understanding of the essential nature of things that Plato identifies as the concern of the philosophers; and it is this hierarchical conception of theoretical over practical understanding that he (and, in a somewhat differently interpreted way, Aristotle) bequeathed to the Western tradition. Moreover, in their enthusiastic preference for the rational and theoretical over the practical and sense-dependent, many later Platonists, Neoplatonists, and some say even Plato himself (in the controversial reports of his allegedly “unwritten” doctrines and “Lecture on the Good” given at his Academy) came to identify numbers with the ideal, timeless form of philosophical knowledge. The distinction between mathematical knowledge and philosophical knowledge thereby came to be blurred, and it is perhaps not too much of a stretch to suggest that one can hear an echo of this ancient preference for mathematical metaphor in the later Western conceptions of technocracy, or rule by scientists and technologists. In any case, Plato did advocate the rule of the “wise,” by which he meant those trained in philosophy, where philosophy is understood as the love of a knowledge that is “like” that of the mathematical scientists but with an additional concern for cultivating a rational vision of the ultimate principles of all things.

Aristotle (384–322 bce) makes just as strong a distinction between higher and lower understanding and is just as convinced as Plato that the highest kind of human life is one of rational contemplation of the “highest things.” Against Plato, however, Aristotle argues that the distinction between practical-technical-artistic understanding, on the one hand, and scientificphilosophical understanding, on the other, really cannot be a distinction involving possession of two kinds of “theories.” Plato’s Socrates appears to claim that moral virtue is a kind of knowledge; but this, counters Aristotle, must be wrong – if for no other reason than that this idea of moral virtue is unable to account for our familiar experience of the weakness of the will. Too obviously, it is possible to have knowledge of what to do but fail to do it. For Aristotle, moral virtue must therefore be conceived as a kind of practical reasoning (jρóνησις, phronēsis) achieved through exposure to experienced teachers, the building of good character, and the formation of the proper habits of activity.

Aristotle also objects to Plato’s tendency to overuse mathematical imagery in depicting not only philosophical and scientific knowledge but practical and political reasoning as well. In the Republic, for example, Plato presents abstract mathematical knowledge as a preliminary to political practice. His Philebus even entertains the notion of a “science of normative measure” (perhaps inspired by the mathematical theory of utility of the leading mathematician Eudoxus, who had joined the Academy). In contrast, Aristotle claims that different disciplines have different degrees of rigor that are appropriate to them. It is wrong to demand mathematical exactness in, say, ethics or politics. The largely implicit practical wisdom required of the citizen or politician, as well as the expertise of the artist and craftsperson, is concerned with generalizing about particular situations and individual things; and this sort of expertise must be carefully distinguished from the explicit theoretical knowledge of the scientist or philosopher, who is concerned with the truly universal and essential in all situations and all things.

For all their differences, however, Plato and Aristotle both developed hierarchical conceptions of knowledge that make philosophical or scientific understanding of the universal and essential superior. Evidence of this line of thinking can be seen in the fact that the ancients did not conceive of technological change and economic production in the modern terms of efficiency and progress. As Schadewaldt explains, our whole modern cluster of terms – nature, knowledge, technique, practical activity – have a very different ontological cast from that of the ancients. Above all, the Greeks did not understand their surroundings as what we call “nature” – that is, as a kind of external reality regarded as the object of our drive toward knowledge. For the Greeks, the cosmos is first of all 𝜑ύ𝜎iς (physis, from which our word “physics” comes) – the whole of things, with all of its motion, changes of shape and, size, and physical development and growth, and generation and degeneration – and we are part of it, placed in it, and the human spirit thus seeks to understand it as that with which we are in any case involved. Hence, it would make no sense to Plato or Aristotle to think of any kind of knowledge as something freely fashioned by us to give us control over something apart from us. Scientific understanding and practical techniques were both judged as analogous to the dynamic processes of the cosmos. The Roman aqueducts, for example, may seem “overbuilt” by modern standards, but that is because they are designed not just to carry water but to do so in perpetuity, to “be” as if things of the cosmos, like rivers and streams. Hence, where we might distinguish between “merely” aesthetic considerations and utility or efficiency in our crafts and practical productions, the ancients would consider both together as inseparable and as receiving their sanction from 𝜑ύ𝜎iς and our understanding of it. (We might note in passing that, in keeping with the supposed natural order of things, the “higher” arts of economic production as well as architecture and sculpture were regarded as best suited to men, whereas manual labor and hands-on crafts were widely considered to be lowly activities fit mostly for women and slaves.)

Through this Greek-pagan orientation, then, there runs a pervasive sense of our being destined to live in harmony with an awesomely comprehensive cosmos to which we are never closer than when we strive to contemplate its first principles. In contrast, Christianity tends to encourage an outlook that fosters the idea of our separation from and superiority over nature. The Christian conception of the material universe as created from nothing by an all-knowing, rational God seems somehow to make that universe both less mysterious than Greek cosmology (see Mesthene’s “The Social Impact of Technological Change,” Chapter 56) and more remote from our true being. The theological interpretation of history as a progress toward our salvation paved the way for the later notions of linear scientific and technological progress. At the same time, the struggle for self-purification against the natural and material forces (introduced in the monastic orders) implicitly increased the dignity of the idea of work, and this imagery would later suggest the possibility of technological and scientific revolutions. All such developments, however, had to await the transfer of these views to a non-religious context (see Lynn White’s essay, Chapter 44). Only in the early modern period did the human control of nature and the essential beneficence of applying scientific knowledge to technology become ruling ideals. The remaining selections in Part I provide a sample of some of the major variations on these modern themes.

Francis Bacon (1561–1626) famously claims that knowledge is power – that is, that through knowledge of nature and its technological applications, humans can achieve a purity of mind and behavior that was lost after the Fall in the Garden of Eden. Thus, in The New Atlantis, Bacon envisages a utopia in which the workers at “Saloman’s House” study the resources of the island and the world to improve the health and welfare of the inhabitants. Here, Plato’s philosopher kings have been transformed into proto-scientists and technologists who guide the nation. Further selections reveal Bacon’s colorful and (as discussed later by Carolyn Merchant, Chapter 40) sometimes disturbingly gendered ways of depicting the acquisition of scientific knowledge and what sort of power it is that such knowledge allegedly gives us. Perhaps most famous of all, there is his Myth of the Sphinx, in which Bacon likens science itself to a seeming monster (to those ignorant of its nature), with wings (for the rapid dissemination of its discoveries), sharp claws (which grip the mind with its clear axioms and telling arguments), mountaintop abode (as befits something so lofty), and apparent riddles (which, when solved, reward beyond measure in the power over ignorance conquered and technologies gained). It is worth contrasting the image of “nature” that must lie behind this conception of knowledge and its acquisition with that of the ancients.

A sophisticated and nuanced version of the secularized doctrine of linear historical progress is found in “The Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View,” by Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). All “animals,” Kant suggests, are destined to fulfill their natural purposes, and in the case of human beings this means the development of scientific and ethical rationality. The idea of human progress toward world government and perpetual peace that Rousseau ridiculed is presented here as empowered by the “unsociable sociability” of humans. Though written in an admittedly somewhat speculative vein, Kant’s essay nevertheless expresses the modern outlook of many who suppose its truth even when they are silent about it. For Kant’s portrayal of rational progress seems to justify the Enlightenment doctrines about our elevation above and over against nature. At the same time, it points forward to the less qualified historical claims of Hegel, Comte, and Marx.

The theme of what would later be called technocracy truly came into its own in the early 1800s with the writings of Henri de Saint-Simon (1760–1825) and Auguste Comte (1798–1857). Comte began his career as Saint-Simon’s assistant, and he came to exert a powerful if often unacknowledged influence over a wide and diverse range of other thinkers by clarifying and extending Saint-Simon’s often sketchy and disorganized ideas into a “System of Positive Philosophy.” The first half of his system focuses on the epistemology of science (his Cours de philosophie positive); the last half develops his ideas on the social and political organization that Comte assumes successful science will make possible (his Système de politique positive). At the heart of his system lies Comte’s philosophy of history and its Law of Three Stages. This law depicts humanity as moving (first intellectually and then in action) through three phases of development, utilizing three “methods” of philosophizing – namely, the theological (or fictive), metaphysical (or abstractly speculative), and scientific (or “positive”). Comte founded and named sociology as the science of society, and his later work is quite explicit about the need to replace traditional religion with a “Religion of Humanity,” so that natural and social scientists and those who apply their knowledge, not the priests of the Catholic Church, would rule. A few positivist churches were actually founded, and some still exist in England and Latin America (Brazil’s flag contains Comte’s slogan, “Order and Progress”). More importantly, however, Comte’s notion of the “priestly” role of scientists and technologists possesses – albeit in a less explicit form – a much greater worldwide significance in twentyfirst-century industrial societies, East and West.

Karl Marx (1818–83) ridiculed the Saint-Simonian and Comtean blueprints for a technocratic utopia, calling them “recipes for the cookshops of the future.” Yet Marx’s collaborator, Engels, displayed much greater sympathy toward their doctrines, and through him, Saint-Simonian phrases – for example, “the administration of things, not of men,” “society as one vast factory,” and “artists as engineers of the soul” – found their way into the Soviet Marxism of both Lenin and Stalin. (Is it mere coincidence that the planners of Disney World are called “Imagineers”?)

In his Discourse on the Sciences and the Arts, Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–78) opposes the prevalent Enlightenment optimism concerning science and its applications. He shocked his contemporaries by challenging their complacent progressivism. Where they saw only scientific progress and the promise of what Comte called “social reorganization” leading to world peace and human happiness, Rousseau perceived progress of the sciences and the arts as leading instead to decline and decadence. Where philosophes such as Voltaire, d’Alembert, and Condorcet anticipated Saint-Simon and Comte in assuming that scientific progress of necessity leads to moral and political progress, Rousseau claims instead that the virtue and vigor of the barbarian nations is destroyed by the spread of civilization. Rousseau’s sensational anti-Baconian manifesto presaged and nourished the Romantic critique of the industrial revolution in subsequent generations in Germany and England.

Marx may have ridiculed the Saint-Simonian and Comtean conceptions of scientific and technological progress. Yet he was, after Bacon, the modern philosopher who made technology most central to his system. Marx’s vision of human history combines elements of the Baconians and Enlightenment philosophes with elements of the German and British Romantics. Like Bacon and the Enlightenment thinkers, Marx is optimistic concerning the development of science and technology as well as about their benefit for humanity in the long run, with the eventual establishment of communism. He shares, however, the pessimism of Rousseau and the Romantics concerning the oppression and alienation produced by science and technology, especially in relation to private property, in the present and short run.

Marx’s account of the role of technology in social change varies from writing to writing. The Poverty of Philosophy contains his famous quip, “the hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist.” His brief and highly influential “Preface to a Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy” identifies the “base” of society as constituted by technological forces and social power relations of production. Many orthodox Marxists have interpreted these passages as proposing a technological determinism. (Ironically, there are many technocrats today who are strongly anti-Marxist but espouse a conception of contemporary post-industrial society that is just as technologically deterministic. For contributions to the non-Marxist debate concerning technological determinism and autonomy, see the later selections by Ellul (Chapters 19 and 36), Heilbronner (Chapter 37), Wyatt (Chapter 39), and Winner (Chapter 55). In the much more detailed discussions of Capital, however, Marx claims that class structure and class struggle control what sort of technology is developed. In these passages, some readers have seen a social determinism that can be used to criticize of technological determinism. Many twentiethand twenty-first-century non-Soviet Marxists – from Chinese Maoists to European Marxist humanists – have gone on to argue that the very idea of technological determinism is a product of a technocratic capitalist ideology (see, e.g., Marcuse, Chapter 38). One key issue in this dispute over whether technology determines social relations or social power determines technological developments is the question of the relative weight of the technological division of labor (i.e., job roles determined by technology) vs. the social division of labor (i.e., job roles and technology determined by the desire of owners and managers to control workers). That Marx and Engels embrace the latter view can be seen, for example, in The German Ideology, where they describe a communist utopia in which one could be at once fisherman, hunter, and intellectual; or in Engels’ later writings, where he rejects the anarchists’ claim that labor discipline and hierarchy can be eliminated. Engels argues that technology by itself enforces certain types of labor discipline and hierarchy.

In any case, through all of these Marx-Engels selections there runs another theme that has also become a major topic of debate. According to Marx, human beings modify their environment with tools because this is our nature, and insofar as we do so, we exhibit our difference from other animals (see, e.g., The German Ideology). In his lifelong collaboration with Engels, Marx developed this conception of the human species into a full-blown account of human evolution from the apes (see “The Part Played by Labor in the Transition from Ape to Man.) This evolutionary conception of humans as essentially tool-making animals has been vigorously criticized by later philosophers of technology, including even humanistic Marxists (see Mumford and Arendt, Chapters 32 and 33). Arendt’s argument is especially challenging, for it contains an immanent criticism, namely, that Marx’s concept of labor displays a deep ambivalence between understanding technological labor as, on the one hand, involving creative world-construction and, on the other, as inseparably linked to degrading oppression.

---
*Source: Philosophy of Technology: The Technological Condition: An Anthology, Second Edition. Edited by Robert C. Scharff and Val Dusek. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.*
---