Technology, Ecology, and the Conquest of Nature

Introduction

As the selections in this part’s first two sections show, to consider the role technology plays (or ought to play) in human life is both to make an issue of our own nature (Are we fundamentally tool-using animals? Powerhungry? Desirous of being creative? Destined to be cogs in a mega-machine?) and also to consider the extent to which the development of technoscience does or might serve human purposes. Clearly, what we conclude about these issues will strongly influence our conception of our legitimate relations to our surroundings. To what extent is it permissible to exploit nature for our own purposes? Are there any limits to power-exercising “Baconianism”? Are there non-exploitive relations with our surroundings that now, for various reasons, are marginalized or ignored? To what extent are various relations really subject to choice? The articles in this section all attempt to bring some focus to these questions – one in the context of feminist criticism of mainstream positions, two in relation the ecological issues that seem to press in upon us through the development of modern technologies, and one in light of recent “posthumanist” speculations that take off from the new possibilities offered by human enhancement technologies.

Carolyn Merchant’s “Mining the Earth’s Womb,” adapted from her influential book The Death of Nature, offers her famously controversial account of a major transition in Western history from a pagan and medieval view of Mother Earth to the modern view of nature as inanimate and barren. Merchant is especially concerned to demonstrate how these two broad and general descriptions have very different “normative import,” that is, encourage and even seem to justify very different sorts of human practices. The transition itself, as well as the normative changes that come with it, can be especially well illuminated, she argues, by tracing the radical alteration of attitudes toward mining. Merchant notes that African smiths and ancient natural historians like Pliny expressed respect for the earth as a living and nurturing being and thus regarded mining as inherently a violation and defilement (cf. Schadewaldt on the ancient Greek conception of physis, Chapter 3). What little mining did occur was undertaken with trepidation, in fear of nature’s revenging herself in earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. During the Renaissance the remnants of this pagan view that had survived into the Christian Middle Ages were eradicated. Merchant analyzes Georg Agricola’s influential De Re Metallica, in which the old prohibitions against mining are turned “on their head” with arguments that pry loose the old assumption that activities like mining are disruptive from the traditional idea that what the Earth conceals is not to be acquired. Agricola argues that mining is not inherently more disruptive than catching fish or making metal tools, especially if one digs in areas that are otherwise undesirable. He insists, moreover, that raw materials are “neutral” in themselves. What is good or bad is our intentions, our reasons for making use of them. In short, what Agricola succeeds in showing by implication – with the key example of mining – is how, quite in general, legitimate use and exploitation of nature might better be distinguished by its (human) purpose than by appeal to (allegedly “natural”) essences. Such arguments, argues Merchant, set the stage for the development of a new global “ethic of exploitation” – one that transforms the idea of defiling a Nurturing Mother into the imagery of exploring and appropriating Mother Nature’s treasures. Further, Merchant stresses how this change of attitude was accompanied and encouraged by changing attitudes toward women. Females and the birth process became less revered. Male medical practitioners discredited female peasant healers, whose arts had been respected by male Renaissance hermeticists and magicians such as Paracelsus and Cornelius Agrippa. With the rise of scientific rationality came the burning of (mainly female) witches. Exit alchemy, with its belief in the “vegetative powers” of gold and silver operative in the “warm womb” of the earth. Enter Bacon, who in Merchant’s view gave crucial assistance to all these changes by providing a kind of codification of the new attitudes toward both nature and women through his analogy between the experimental interrogation of nature and the seduction and conquest of woman.

Some philosophers have objected that feminists like Merchant and Sandra Harding are seriously misreading Bacon’s use of metaphors of forceful seduction in his articulations of the new relation between scientist and nature. They argue that it is illegitimate to construe Bacon’s famous imagery of the scientist “hounding” nature as rape, and that a closer analysis of Bacon’s metaphors reveals that either the imagined sexual connotations are not really there or, when they are, they are not intended to demean women. So, for example, is it really necessary to accept Merchant’s claim that Bacon’s model for “interrogating” nature is the interrogation of witches by torture? Bacon nowhere actually states this connection; hence, there is no indisputable proof. In short, the general strategy is to reject sociocultural appeals to the context of Bacon’s references to sex and to nature as female. Nevertheless, the interpretive waters remain muddy here. Some years after Bacon’s death, founders of the Baconian-inspired British Royal Society – among them, Henry Oldenburg, Joseph Glanvill, and Thomas Sprat – advocated the establishment of an entirely “masculine philosophy” that would eliminate anything “feminine” from their theories and activities. As other articles in this anthology suggest, the crucial question remains how little or how much the gendered character of the dominant images and language in traditional philosophy matters, and the issue is not merely one of setting the historical record straight.

The next two articles concentrate on the “deep-ecological” claim that an excessive estimation of our own importance, a pervasive “anthropocentrism,” has come to threaten our very universe. The views of Arne Naess – a Norwegian philosopher of empirical linguistics who founded the Deep Ecology movement – are discussed and clarified in Bill Devall’s paper. As he shows, Naess grounds his conception of deep ecology in what he calls an “ecosophy” rather than ecology. The latter is just the scientific study of the environment as we find it, one that makes predictions about what we can expect under various conditions and offers expert advice on policy issues. But the ecological movement, characterized in a manner that echoes Merchant, is “clearly and forcefully normative” – which means it is as much concerned with “wisdom” as with scientific “knowledge.” Naess views ecosophy as a kind of general systems theory, inspired by the naturalisms of Spinoza and Aristotle. Spinoza in particular seems to have influenced him; for his pantheistic, monistic rationalism treats God and the world as one substance, and mind and body as complementary aspects of a single unity. (Some of Naess’ followers have noted that Einstein, too, revered Spinoza, and that in following out the full implications of General Relativity, he treated objects as singularities in the space-time continuum rather than as separate substances.) Like Spinoza, Naess denies metaphysical status to presumably “separate” entities, just as he denies that it is a sufficiently “global” response to our current circumstances to fight against pollution and resource depletion. Such fights reflect a “shallow” ecological movement through which piecemeal environmental problem-solving effectively aids primarily the affluent populations of developed countries. In his later writings, Naess draws on the Buddhist conception of the unreality of the ego-self in order to argue for a kind of self-realization that would involve moving beyond the conception of one’s being as an “individual,” toward a more expansive understanding of the “ecological self” (cf. Schumacher, Chapter 35).

Devall’s article makes more explicit the philosophical influences relied upon not only by Naess himself but by others in the deep ecology movement. Using Kuhn’s terminology (see the Kuhn selection, Chapter 10), Devall formulates deep ecology as an alternative to the dominant (albeit now widely criticized) paradigm of economic growth, progress, and domination of nature (the “storehouse”). He cites numerous sources of inspiration – for example, White (see Chapter 44) on the Judeo-Christian origins of the idea of the domination of nature, Eastern spiritual and Native American earth-centered traditions, Spinoza’s critique of Descartes and Bacon, and Heidegger (see Chapter 27). Devall claims that to displace the traditional paradigm and promote the newly emerging “ecological consciousness,” we will have to develop a new cosmology that stresses Naess’ “biological equalitarianism,” a new “ecological psychology” that attunes us to the “total intermingling” of every real thing, and a new philosophical anthropology that inspires a politics based on hunter-gatherer societies rather than on industrial capitalist societies with their stress on scarcity and acquisition.

Australian philosopher Ariel Kay Salleh criticizes deep ecology from an eco-feminist perspective. Citing both Naess and Devall, Salleh complains of the pervasive rationalistic and scientistic language in which they still philosophize. In her view, the influence on Naess of the logical empiricist and contemporary analytic philosophical traditions often appears to blunt the presentation of his alternative. Thus, he likens his approach to general systems theory and speaks in the idiom of policy science, data, programming, and control – apparently not realizing how this merely reintroduces the very “cultural scientism” of the shallow ecology he opposes. Moreover, he formulates ecosophy as a set of “intuitions” to be analytically clarified and formulated into an axiology – again, without taking note of the way this reintroduces precisely the dualisms of norm and fact, ruler and ruled, control and submission that he supposes to be part of the problem. Above all, argues Salleh, one sees in the new paradigm that Naess advocates for our relations with our environment that “man” is still used generically. Here, again, deep ecologists seem to uncritically ignore and carry forward central features of the dominant Western intellectual tradition – this time in connection with the pervasive sexism that feminists have been especially concerned to challenge. Perhaps Devall has avoided Naess’ scientism with his appeal to phenomenology and Heidegger, and by looking for the source of our urge to dominate nature in the Judeo-Christian creation story, or in the technics-run-wild as portrayed by Mumford (see Chapter 32), or in capitalism as portrayed by Marx; but he too fails to recognize that patriarchy is the real cause of this urge. In contrast, claims Salleh, the convergence of the feminist and ecology movements is no accident. In a seemingly more essentialist voice than Haraway (see Chapter 51) or social constructionist feminists would find acceptable, Salleh speaks of women both as intrinsically more connected with nature through menstruation, childbirth, and breast-feeding, and also, again unlike men, as much more likely to form small, intimate collectivities instead of hierarchical power structures. For Salleh, males would therefore appear to be constitutionally unable to consistently present or realize the ideals of deep ecology.

In general, then, the question to ponder is how far deep ecologists can get by gesturing toward current Continental philosophy, and by locating the source of our urge to dominate nature in religious myth, technological excess, economic ideology, or cultural patriarchy. Are these strategies sufficient to challenge the pervasive (and quite probably gender-linked) “Baconian” view of our surroundings in which human life seems currently (as Heidegger says) “enframed”?

In contrast with Merchant, Naess, Devall, and Salleh, Bostrom embraces the modern outlook that they oppose. Where they sense everywhere a fundamentally problematic atmosphere, he sees instead technological progress, punctuated with specific “social problems” to be met as they arise – with facts, education, and wide public debate about wise choices, not with abstract and alarmist rhetoric or science-fictional horror stories. Bostrom’s discussion centers on the question of human enhancement technologies, where medical and biological advances now make possible not only relatively uncontroversial practices like organ transplants and restorative surgery, but also, literally, “enhancements,” that is, somatic and cognitive alterations like genetic engineering and machine intelligence that push the boundaries of our understanding of what it is to be human and that are (at least potentially) available simply for the choosing by otherwise perfectly “normal” people. In this paper, Bostrom defends a “transhumanist” outlook on these developments – which is the outlook that he sees as the natural outgrowth of Enlightenment optimism about science and technology (see Mitcham, Chapter 45) and the secular humanism that accompanies it – against “bioconservatives” – which is what he labels a cluster of thinkers who tend to see the very idea of technological enhancement as a threat to our conceptions of human nature and human dignity.

Bostrom’s basic strategy is to dispose of the bioconservatives’ outlook with a thousand cuts – by discrediting, one by one, their examples of what they think is or might be undesirable about this or that human enhancement. In each case, he argues that they tend to mistakenly rely on and pessimistically over-generalize from a static conception either of human nature (as if “we” have always had the same nature, when in fact it has been developing, largely through improvements in our technologies, all along) or of technology (as if our present technologies, with all their limitations and dangers, are the best there will ever be). “Human nature,” he notes, is not a Platonic form. In the eyes of the hunter-gatherer, today’s “normal human beings” would no doubt seem “posthuman.” Of course, he says, not all change is good; but this is hardly a telling mark against technology specifically when it is generally true about all change.

In passing, Bostrom makes some interesting remarks about how to conceptualize what is humanly or cosmically real. In addressing the bioconservatives’ tendency to rely on unchanging ideas of what is “natural,” Bostrom turns the tables on them. Where they see a threat to any idea of human dignity that is not grounded in something “essential,” he argues that the greater danger comes when it is. Fortunately, he observes, we have tended not to be essentialists about human nature. As a result, women and people of color are now considered human too. Besides, the problem of treating “others” as less than human is hardly unique to the use of technology. Finally, Bostrom questions the promotion of essentialist ideas of nature. “Had Mother Nature been a real parent,” he retorts, “she would have been in jail for child abuse and murder.” The point is, bioconservatives actually seem to presuppose an exaggerated fear that change will be disastrous, and then pessimistically and without adequate empirical grounds deduce that it will give us only more of the same, perhaps under somewhat improved conditions. Transhumanists, however, project from what has actually happened, and thus anticipate not just much better but maybe eventually even “posthuman” conditions – which if they come, will be facilitated in the same way improved conditions have always come – through technological progress.

Bostrom makes all opposition to his technoscientific progressivism seem “conservative” or even reactionary. But is it? Can all the objections to transhumanism be satisfactorily met by Bostrom’s paeans to growth and development, to his liberal-democratic appeals to “human rights and individual choice,” and to the idea of expanding “morphological” and “reproductive” freedoms? Can all technological excess and misuse – for example, “military and terrorist abuse [as opposed to mere use?] of bioweapons,” or “unwanted [by whom?] environmental or social side-effects” – be adequately understood as merely “concrete threats” calling for specific “social remedies”? And what of Salleh’s concerns about the modern outlook’s pervasive sexism? Obviously, such questions are not easily answered, and they are certainly not rhetorical; but it is useful to keep them in mind when considering the selections in Part VI.