Is Technology Autonomous?

Introduction

From the perspective of inquiries that emphasize technology’s global reach and pervasive influence, the question naturally arises whether technology constitutes a power or force of its own, beyond the control of its human creators. In other words, is technology autonomous? Does it determine rather than serve our intentions and purposes? Does technology possess a logic or (more metaphorically) a will of its own?

Jacques Ellul is perhaps the most famous proponent of the autonomy thesis. In his view, the fact that people finance, invent, consume, and even seem to regulate technology – all of this is more appearance than reality. Ellul never refers to Max Weber as a source of inspiration, but his position resembles Weber’s in two important respects. First, his notion of “technique” closely resembles Weber’s conception of the “rationalization” of social practice. According to Weber, in our eagerness to bring everything from scientific research to daily human relations under rules and explicit organization, we tend increasingly to transform reason entirely into something “instrumental” and means-oriented, and we thereby cease to think about the question of the ultimate ends of our practices. Moreover, with this instrumentalist focus comes a certain pervasive blindness to, as Weber puts it, the unintended consequences of human action.

Ellul’s critique begins, Weber-like, with a refusal to accept the idea that technology is in fact just the total collection of instrumental means. A close look at how “the technological phenomenon” actually functions demonstrates that all of the human activities we “grandly presume” are independent from and thus empowered to direct and control technology are in fact bound up with and beholden to it. Science, the political order, economics, our (vastly overestimated) mental powers – all of these are repeatedly put in service of “the technological demand” for more invention, more development, more control – all the more so at the very moment when we display the greatest vanity in assuming we can decide when and where invention, development, and control are desirable and valuable. Ellul identifies several of the factors that account for our blindness to all of this. For one thing, it is characteristic of those who claim possession of the ability to control the direction of technological development to overestimate their skills. Scientists and engineers display embarrassing naïveté and shallowness in dealing with the social impact of technology. Politicians are driven by ideological assumptions rather than knowledge in their efforts to direct or regulate technical practices. And ordinary citizens and consumers are seriously uninformed about both the technical practices and the social realities that dominate everyday life. Moreover, the technological system itself entrances us all – technologists, politicians, and consumers alike. Advertising and propaganda successfully channel our desires. Admired as endlessly innovative, scientifically informed (and informing), and progress-oriented, technology comes to be taken as the primary “creative force” in our lives, and its values displace traditional morality, which is then regarded as merely something lingering “inside” our minds that has already disappeared from the “outside” world of real affairs.

Ellul’s arguments seem to imply technological determinism. In simple terms, determinism is the thesis that all things and events are caused by some previous things and events. The most popular models for this thesis derive their persuasiveness from the evidence of the predictive success of classical physics, particularly Newtonian mechanics. Persuasive or not, however, determinism is never advocated for very long without evoking serious opposition from all those for whom our experience of free will is too real to be explained away. Philosophers have offered various gambits that attempt either to reconcile determinism and free will (e.g., as characterizing the physical and mental realms, respectively) or to identify equally legitimate standpoints (e.g., the scientific and the ethical, respectively) from which human action can be regarded as determined or free. Determinism, of course, comes in numerous forms. Put in very general terms, biological or genetic determinism claims that who we are is simply a function of our genetic makeup – that we are, in effect, robots guided by our genes. Economic determinism holds that all our activities are ultimately intelligible in terms of the influence of market forces. Technological determinism, then, is the thesis that technology somehow causes all other aspects of society and culture, and hence that changes in technology dictate changes in society.

Marx’s Preface to The Critique of Political Economy (see Chapter 8) has often been read as espousing technological determinism. The interpretation is difficult to sustain, however, given Marx’s descriptions of the role of class struggle in shaping the direction of technological development. In fact, it is many of the Cold War era anti-Marxist defenders of a post-industrial society (e.g., Daniel Bell, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and others mentioned by Mesthene and in McDermott’s critique of him, Chapter 57; but also Wyatt’s selection below) that speak the language of the single-minded technological determinist better than Marx; for they claim – and urge that we find political satisfaction in the claim – that the replacement of machine technology by information technology simply generates new classes of technocrats and service workers in a unilateral and unavoidable manner.

Robert Heilbroner’s examination of technological determinism in “Do Machines Make History?” has become something of a classic. According to Heilbroner, the deterministic thesis has two parts that are often run together. About both parts he claims to be “softly” deterministic. First, there is the question of whether there has in fact been a determinate pattern, or “fixed sequence” of technological evolution. On this question, he offers a somewhat qualified Yes. He acknowledges that the linear, logical, ostensibly automatic progress of science, especially when conceived with the aid of an interpretation of technology as applied science, makes technological progress appear inevitable. Even apparently “premature” technological inventions (Heilbroner mentions Hero’s depiction of a steam engine in ancient Greece and Charles Babbage’s nineteenth-century calculator) are not really counterexamples, for upon closer inspection these devices were not really feasible in their day because of limitations in other technology (here, a lack of “material competence” in metal-working). On the second question, whether technology “imposes a determinate pattern” on society, Heilbroner offers a still more heavily qualified Yes. There is no doubt, he says, that the composition of the labor force and the organization of work are “influenced” by technology. Yet this influence can only seem like the operation of a full-blown causality when one looks at the effect of machines on society but fails to do the reverse. Thus to Heilbroner, who begins with Marx’s famous claim in the Poverty of Philosophy – that “the hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist” – this seems like a serious overstatement. In a manner suggesting a preference for softly economic rather than technological determinism, Heilbroner closes his discussion with a list of several ways in which capitalism (or even a socialism “based on maximizing profits and minimizing costs”) stimulates the development and expansion of both modern science and technology.

Critical theorists like Herbert Marcuse (in this section) and Andrew Feenberg (in Chapter 58) resist the pull of technological determinism by arguing that a certain pervasive ideology of technocracy – that is, a seriously inflated picture of the social and political importance of those who have expertise in the sciences and in technology – plays a major role in making technological autonomy appear plausible. Like Ellul, Marcuse describes the way advertising and political propaganda are utilized to control citizen-consumers; and like Weber, he stresses the tendency in contemporary society toward the complete “rationalization” of all its practices. Unlike Weber, however, Marcuse does not accept this process with what in others seems to him like Stoic resignation. Instead, he argues that the so-called rationalization of society and culture (Marcuse is drawing here on Freud’s idea of “rationalization”) can be quite irrational. The key, argues Marcuse, is to recognize that science and technology are both part of a “one-dimensional” universe of discourse whose moral and political agenda is set by the needs of a particular industrial (i.e., capitalist) social order. However illogical (e.g., “free” means acceptable to Free World capitalists and “socialist” means everything that fails to serve the interests of private enterprise), the inner logic of this order will continue to dominate our lives until the very success it is currently achieving through the technoscientific domination of nature and human life makes the continuing struggle to contain this success within outmoded institutions intolerable. Today, Marcuse argues, the whole sociopolitical order merely facilitates more productivity while suppressing the free actualization of “new dimensions of human realization” that this very productivity now makes possible. Genuine rationalization would involve a very different, utopian, social arrangement; and it would have to be achieved by means of an alternative and genuinely emancipatory technology. For behind technology as presently understood, there is only the impetus for more control of human beings for the sake of more production for the greater benefit of those who are already getting the most benefit from the present social order.

In her much-cited review of the whole debate, Sally Wyatt begins, not by defending or criticizing technological determinism, but by considering how and why, in spite of all its apparent flaws as a thesis, the idea continues to be accepted by so many social actors as well as by many analysts of technological activity, including those in the Science, Technology, and Society (STS) movement with which she identifies. Her conclusion is that, for both actors and analysts, technological determinism is often not really taken as a rational principle to be justified by argument; rather, it functions as a basically plausible means of making sense out of what they experience (or study) and what they can or should do (or empirically report) about it.

To follow Wyatt’s arguments, one must recognize the point of her change in perspective. Where philosophers quarrel over the objective truth, essential usefulness, genuine reality, or axiological rightness of technological determinism as a thesis, Wyatt speaks for social science, explaining that STS researchers simply want to understand technology’s role in human history and social life. Like Pinch and Bijker (Chapter 24), Wyatt embraces a somewhat expanded version of David Bloor’s “principle of symmetry.” If the aim is to understand, for example, what people think is true, or what they use because they think it works, then truth and utility must be interpreted as socially constructed ideas internal to the culture in which they develop – that is, ideas that are “symmetrical” in importance with any other such ideas developed elsewhere, and independently of any later “objective” judgments about the superiority or inferiority of these ideas. Thus, to cite a case made famous by Pinch and Bijker (discussed by Feenberg in Chapter 58), it might be tempting to come to the study of the history of the bicycle with our present appreciation for the greater “efficiency” of chain-driven bicycles with equal-sized wheels; but to do so would guarantee our failure to understand all those who rode for sport and thus preferred the other available kind of bicycle (with a high front wheel and pedals attached directly its axle) because it was, for the time and for the purpose, the most “efficiently” designed for risk and speed.

What Wyatt adds to the mix is the idea of the symmetry of beliefs and theories, not just among social actors, but between actors and those, like STS researchers, who analyze the actors. Only with this expansion of the principle, she argues, are researchers able to fully acknowledge all of the ways that human beings “construct” their ideas about technological determinism without secretly evaluating them by privileging either the researchers’ own ideas or those of the most visible actors. Favoring the former reinforces the old idea of scientists as omniscient observers, and favoring the latter encourages researchers to simply “follow the [primary] actors” and thus overlook the less visible users and the effect of their beliefs on sociotechnological relations. Wyatt cites with approval Anthony Giddens’ notion of a “double hermeneutic,” for its fostering of symmetrical treatment of both actors’ and researchers’ identification of other actors and their interests.

Using this expanded version of the principle of symmetry, says Wyatt, we can see that for both social actors and STS researchers, the idea of technological determinism actually functions in four different ways. First, there is its “justificatory” use, which is important primarily to actors – especially in relation to social policy issues, where government and corporate leaders appeal to it to defend the “necessity” of their political or economic decisions. Second, there is a “descriptive” use, important primarily to researchers in their characterizations of the actual historical and social record. Third, there is what Wyatt calls a “methodological” use (allegedly, e.g., Heilbroner’s version), which she seems to think of as also accepted by STS researchers in their non-traditional decision to place special emphasis on the role of technology in human affairs. Finally, there is a “normative” use, exemplified by Langdon Winner’s insistence on the idea that technology has become so complex and ubiquitous that we must now admit that it displays an autonomy beyond social control.

Wyatt concludes by acknowledging what she sees as STS’s “guilty secret,” namely, that to a certain degree all technology researchers are and have to be technological determinists. Whatever we might ourselves think about the thesis, she says, it is obvious not only that technology does in fact centrally affect society in many ways, but also that some species of technological determinism is widely employed both by social actors and their analysts. “We are not innocent in the ways of methodological and normative technological determinism,” says Wyatt, “but we can no longer afford to be so obtuse in ignoring the justificatory technological determinism of so many actors” – and in the process eliminate much of what STS studies. It goes without saying that a research-driven decision like Wyatt’s – that is, a decision to understand rather than philosophically evaluate technological determinism – does not make the “methodological and normative” issues usually associated with the idea go away.