Technology and the Lifeworld

Indeed, in contrast with Islam and even Eastern Orthodoxy, medieval Catholicism explicitly stressed human action over contemplation. The early monasteries, isolated during the barbarian invasions, were of necessity self-sufficient. Work came to be viewed as a means of redemption; manual labor, as a sort of piety; and salvation, as something to be attained by good works. Technological devices – for example, organs in church services and mechanical clocks scheduling prayers (both banned by Eastern Orthodoxy) – could thus be interpreted as furthering religious vocation; and as White notes, this meant that Eastern technologies were welcomed and used more widely than in their home countries. Joseph Needham’s writings are full of examples of technologies the West received from China – not only inventions Bacon mistakenly claimed for the modern West (i.e., gunpowder, printing, and the compass), but scores of other mechanical, chemical, and medical technologies. White documents how Western Christianity fostered an attitude that made these cultural transfers possible. The linear time sequence of biblical theology – with its story of creation, subsequent history, and promise of a final judgment – stands in stark contrast to the cyclical time of East Asian religions and the ancient Greeks. And where Eastern Orthodoxy remained contemplative and enamored of the timeless, Western Catholicism did not. In Augustine, for example, human life is defined as essentially temporal. Time is therefore something precious, and labor-saving devices necessarily desirable. In contrast to the slave labor-based societies of Greece and Rome, in Catholic monastic life manual labor was not despised. Work stood alongside prayer as a means of living a holy life and glorifying God. Alexandrian Greeks in late antiquity and Byzantine emperors used mechanical devices primarily for mystifying and magical purposes (e.g., in Egypt, opening temple doors and dispensing holy water; in Constantinople, raising the emperor’s throne into the air in a cloud of colored smoke and surrounded by mechanical birds to awe barbarian ambassadors). However, self-supporting Catholic monasteries used wheelbarrows, cranks, and pulleys to save labor. Western Christians developed technologies to expand agriculture and speed up the processing of food, and medieval northern Europe became the most productive agricultural area in the world. It is interesting to ponder whether technological determinism still seems as plausible in light of White’s account of the religious roots of the European drive for power and control – rather like asking whether Marxist economic determinism still seems as plausible after reading Max Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.

As the title of his essay indicates, Carl Mitcham begins with one of Heidegger’s key ideas, the famous analysis of the human condition as “being-in-the-world.” Though Mitcham admits he is removing the idea from its original context in Being and Time, he insists that his account of how it is to “be-with” technology still “takes off” from Heidegger’s basic point, namely, that it is our practical-technical engagements, not our quest for theoretical knowledge, that ordinarily predominate in life and therefore best illuminate the nature of our relationships with our surroundings and with other people. Mitcham identifies three historical-philosophical, ideal-typical attitudes toward technology – namely, ancient skepticism (think of Plato and Aristotle), Enlightenment optimism (Bacon and Comte), and Romantic uneasiness (Rousseau). Each attitude understands and articulates a fundamentally different sort of relation between ourselves and technology, and each, respectively, has been the most prominent in premodern, early modern, and (to a lesser extent) later modern times. Summarizing his results in a four-part comparative table, Mitcham explains how differently each outlook construes technology’s essential character, its proper role in ethical and political affairs, the epistemological status of technological knowledge, and the metaphysical status of its artifacts. One salutary effect of his presentation is that it provides concise summaries of the outlooks taken by a number of other thinkers who appear elsewhere in this anthology.

Mitcham’s main point, however, is contemporary and suggestive, not historical and analytical. He thinks the contrasts and conflicts among the three attitudes continue to echo in our own experiences with technology. So, regarding the first attitude, it is certainly true that we (in the developed West) can no longer embrace an “ancient skepticism” that appeals to myths about angered gods to express the sense that technology might be “necessary but dangerous.” We are also less likely to regard all manual labor as degrading, or to hold out for a “higher wisdom” that makes practical inventiveness seem like an unworthy expression of what is genuinely “human.” Yet who in our age of technical excess is not attracted to, say, Socrates’ warning that neither natural philosophy nor technical expertise will ever reveal the secrets of the good life?

Unlike the ancients, early modern philosophers like Bacon often construe invention and discovery as ordained by God, and thus as offering us a way to recover the state of purity of the Garden of Eden. As Mitcham suggests (echoing White, above), if one strips this thought of its specifically religious trappings, its core idea is certainly not dead: that scientific knowledge – far from being a distraction from the pursuit of higher wisdom – is actually the royal road to the good life. Further, as Mitcham notes, insofar as the test for scientific knowledge is success in the manipulation and control of nature, the early modern view promotes the (certainly not unfamiliar) idea that experimentation – or more generally, technoscientific engagement with the world – supplants contemplation as the definitive expression of the essential human outlook. Hence, from Bacon to Comte – and in some moods, still also for us – technology can seem to be a wholly beneficial force, promising not only dominion over nature but moral and political progress. Commerce and the crafts, more than the relatively less technological activity of agriculture, seem the practical ideals. And doesn’t human inventiveness seem akin to divine creation? After all, if the world is God’s artifact, and human artifacts are produced by the same “natural” principles, then aren’t they just as “real” as Creation itself?

For all its initial appeal, however, there has been growing distaste for the sort of scientistic positivism just described. Yet as Mitcham notes, with regard to this outlook we have typically behaved more like ambivalent Romantics than outright opponents. Romantics, too, like the early modern and Enlightenment thinkers, harbor a deep admiration for the tremendous possibilities of technological power. Yet Romanticism expresses strong misgivings about the exercise of this power, for it seems obvious that the industrial revolution which the New Science brought with it has given us not only new material wealth but environmental destruction and miserable working and living conditions for all but the few. Romantics thus reject a mechanical, rationalistic understanding of nature in favor of an organic and intuitive one; and like the ancients, they see technology as in need of restraint. While Enlightenment thinkers see nature in terms of human artifice, Romantics see human creativity as an outgrowth of nature – a talent to be used “properly.” Mitcham closes with the provocative suggestion that we may actually tend to be Romantics in our hearts, but precisely because we share Romanticism’s ambivalent stance between the ancients’ suspicion of technology and the Enlightenment’s optimistic promotion of it, we keep losing whatever power we might otherwise presume to gain by explicitly adopting a Romantic outlook.

Don Ihde’s phenomenological account of technology-enhanced perception, loosely based on Husserl’s Crisis and Heidegger’s Being and Time, makes use of the same idea that attracted Mitcham’s attention – namely, that human beings, their technologies, and the surrounding world form a structural whole, a being-in-the-world, whose experientially recognizable features merit (but often fail to receive) careful analysis. In this selection, Ihde says little about traditional and non-phenomenological interpretations of technology, but some of his criticisms of them are easy to detect between the lines. He clearly rejects, for example, the very idea that relations with our surroundings are ever a matter of “bare” perception. There is, he insists, no “simple seeing” – no initial, contextless, foundational contact with an uninterpreted world. All our relations involve both “microperception” (immediate, focused, actual seeing, hearing, etc.) and “macroperception” (simultaneous sociocultural contextualizing); and these together constitute an existential relation whose meaning can always be elaborated but never needs to be “added on” to the encounter itself. For Ihde, one reason this point is so frequently missed is that the traditional model for human–world relations has been that of a mind standing over against a world full of material things. This model, however, is inappropriate (i.e., unphenomenological) in several ways. For one thing, it ignores the fact that all I–world relations are “embodied” relations. I am engaged “with” my surroundings not just in terms of my thoughts, but through my body and my body’s capacities. Moreover, the meaning of my relations with my surroundings is not simply a function of my directed, conscious awareness of this or that, but always involves “background relations” and a sociocultural understanding that contextualizes and provides “cues” for dealing with whatever happens to be in focus. Finally, the traditional model privileges direct, or what Ihde calls “unmediated,” relations, perhaps in part out of epistemologically exaggerated fears of skepticism brought on by drinking too deeply from the springs of British Empiricism. Whatever the reasons, however, since technology relations are actually always embodied, richly implicit, mediated relations, the traditional model cannot in principle do them justice.

Part of Ihde’s alternative account – his analysis of the microperceptual aspect of technology relations – appears below. Using the fiction of a “New Adam” in a technology-free Eden, Ihde contrasts the naïve, unmediated, “naked” apprehending of one’s surroundings that would predominate in such an Eden with the mostly mediated, technoscientifically transformed relations one experiences today. Analyzing these experiences specifically in terms of their “direct and focal” dimensions, he identifies three sets of technology relations and distinguishes them in terms of the way our embodied selves, our various technologies, and the surrounding world are meaningfully but differently configured in each. First, there are “embodiment relations,” strictly so called – relations in which technologies constitute and approximate the status of a “quasi-me” – as, for example, when we use eyeglasses or a hammer. In such cases, if the technologies do their job, we perceive through them, making them extensions of our own embodiment. Second, there are “hermeneutic relations” – relations in which the “readable” (i.e., interpretable) technologies with which we encounter the world make it accessible in ways that are impossible for naked perception – as, for example, when written language presents us with what is otherwise remote from our time and place, or a thermometer gives us a scaled and enhanced measurement of what is otherwise just some version of “hot” or “cold,” or too extreme to experience at all. Finally, there are “alterity relations” – relations in which technologies themselves become “quasi-others” to which we can relate – as, for example, in playing video games or interacting with robots. Though he does not use the word, Ihde makes it clear that alterity relations sometimes involve a kind of fetishizing of otherwise useful technologies. (It goes without saying, of course, that most technological mediations are mixed cases, so that Ihde’s classifications should be understood as characterizations of whichever of the three predominates.)

Ihde closes with a provocative criticism of those who would see in our ever more technologically mediated experience the dream (or nightmare) of a culture that has been utterly transformed into a kind of technological “cocoon.” Could there ever be, he asks, a kind of “New Eve” in a “Spaceship” of Total Technology, where nothing remains “natural,” and every human frailty and limitation is subject to a technoscientific fix? On this issue, Ihde sounds a much more optimistic note than most of those who have been influenced by Heidegger (e.g., Borgmann and Dreyfus). For him, an entirely artificial world – a sort of global recreational vehicle with all the amenities – is as much a fiction as the idea of a pure, non-technological Eden. It only seems like a real possibility when one forgets the world’s actual pluralism of cultures, that is, forgets that the idea of Spaceship Earth is a product of “our” distinctive history. Ihde says nothing further about the parameters of this “our,” however, and in the end leaves the issue unsettled by asking whether, out of all the messy and unequal technological pluralism of the present, we might actually discern a “single trajectory” emerging that envisions one high-tech world culture. That, he says (but without any expectation it might be so), would make “the Marcuses, Jonases, and Elluls … the prophets of our times.” Of course to Ihde’s earlier list, we should now also add people like the architects and engineers of the new Korean “Smart City” of Songdo and transhumanists like Nick Bostrom (see Chapter 43).

Ihde’s phenomenological approach to technology has become very popular in northern European/Scandinavian universities, research institutes, and policy planning organizations (especially those associated with the EU). In the last 15 years, and following Ihde’s own self-interpretation, adherents have come to call themselves “postphenomenologists,” in order to identify the extent to which their “empirical turn” comes after both Husserl and Heidegger, and picks up elements from pragmatist philosophy and science studies to flesh out their accounts of our lived relations with particular technological devices and experiences of technological practices. The selection from Peter-Paul Verbeek’s What Things Do is a good illustration of the direction technoscience studies has taken in the past two decades, especially for postphenomenologists. Although they typically are willing to acknowledge their indebtedness both to Husserl and to the “classical philosophers of technology” (meaning primarily Heidegger, but for Verbeek also Karl Jaspers), their self-descriptions mostly stress their strong sense of disagreement with their forebears.

As Verbeek explains, many of those who have come after Husserl now hold that genuinely phenomenological accounts of our experience of the technoscientific “things themselves” cannot be presented in his still all-too-modern philosophical framework of methodologically prepared subjects looking for the essential features of objects – and employing the dichotomies of cognition/feeling, absolutism/relativism, and inner mind/outer world in the process. Because this framework that still plagues Husserl’s own work, postphenomenologists propose to “radicalize” it, as Verbeek says, which means beginning with pre-theoretical, technologically mediated practical existence – that is, the manner of living in which we are always already being “co-constituted” along with the things we encounter and use. The influence of Heidegger’s conception of pre-theoretical existence, Idhe’s notion of technological mediation, and Latour’s emphasis on materiality are all evident here. Where Husserl seeks “essential” descriptions of a self–world correlation understood in terms of “intentional” relations between consciousness and its objects, postphenomenologists see our existence instead in terms of the way all our material technologies “act” upon our practices (i.e., have their own “technological intentionalities”) at the very same time that these technologies are being engineered and variously utilized by us. Everything “is” in relation with our experiences of it, and vice versa; hence, who “we” are and what things or artifacts are cannot be fully disclosed apart from careful, detailed study of their interrelations.

Of course, the abstract statement that everything is related to everything else is easy to make and illuminates nothing. As postphenomenologists see it, however, part of the problem is that the whole modern philosophical tradition appeals to the negation of this abstraction in order to point away from actually studying this pre-theoretical self–technology–world relatedness – and thus condemns our “lived experience” of this relatedness to the status of something that is merely and subjectively pre-philosophical. From Descartes’ Meditations on (and arguably back to Plato), says Verbeek, philosophers have often fallen victim to the “Orphic temptation” of believing that they could acquire the one, true, objective standpoint from which All Would Be Clear (i.e., the outlook Merleau-Ponty calls “the philosophy of the God-like survey” and analytic philosophers, the “View from Nowhere”).

Hence, the label “postphenomenology” is as much the expression of a distinctive philosophical self-understanding – a pledge to acknowledge that even philosophers proceed with their work inescapably living and thinking “in the midst” of things – as it is the indication of a research program. Two of its central ideas are worth singling out here. First, there is the notion of the “multistability” of technologies, which rests on Ihde’s idea of “technological mediation.” Ihde, Verbeek, and other postphenomenologists argue that technological mediation, precisely in its being a mediation, involves relations with technologies that must be seen as having “intentionalities” of their own. Speed bumps, for example, “make” us slower drivers; communication and transportation technologies help shape our sense of distance; and medical technologies change our sense of being mortal, In each case, our world makes sense through and by means of these mediations. (In Moralizing Technology (2011), Verbeek argues for the “morality of things,” to make the point that technological intentionalities frame our sense of the good life, not just our practical affairs and quest for knowledge. So, for example, choosing not to screen for birth defects using ultrasound – where the sheer availability of the machine sets up a forced option – is a way of taking a moral position.) The general idea, of course, is to get away from the traditional picture of objects – most importantly here, technological things – sitting over against cognizing conscious subjects that are trying to figure out “the” nature that the objects simply have “intrinsically,” all by themselves. Postphenomenologists do not, however, think the traditional picture is false. Indeed, it clearly isn’t; cognizing things in a “Cartesian” way is, as Husserl shows, precisely that mode of intentional relation (or “existence”) in which objects-with-intrinsic-properties actually “are” as they disclose themselves “for” a methodologically prepared consciousness. What postphenomenology holds against Husserl is that his standpoint cannot properly handle the fact that there are multiple sorts of intentional relations, running the gamut from the pre-theoretically practical to the sub-atomically oriented theoretical, and most of them do not map on his model of consciousness-and-objects. Ihde and Verbeek have frequently used the Necker cube to make this point. Which “perspective” gives us the “correct” interpretation of the cube? The trick is not to answer – that is, to realize that the figure is fully meaningful or “stable” in “multiple” ways. (Hence, notes Verbeek, postphenomenologists are philosophical “realists,” but pluralistically so.)

The notion of multistability is linked to another important feature of postphenomenology, namely, its self-conception as having “two dimensions,” or tasks. In Verbeek’s language, it is concerned, first, with the hermeneutical task of interpreting how technologies “shape our access to the world,” but also, second, with existential questions of how the whole material-technical environment shapes the way human beings “realize their existence.” The first concern is framed largely in terms taken from Ihde; the latter concern is worked out in a critical appropriation of social constructivism and, more specifically, Latour’s actor-network theory (see Part III). As Verbeek explains, postphenomenologists agree with Latour’s claim that to understand how the technoscientific world really is, one must describe the ways people and technologies are always “acting” together (i.e., “co-constituting” each other) in a vast and complex “network.” But they do not accept the social constructivists’ methodological principle of symmetry for understanding this network (see Pinch and Bijker, Chapter 24), because it bars any privileging of a “human” perspective on it. The principle of symmetry may well be acceptable to social scientists who see their mandate as one of “shifting from standpoint to standpoint,” describing everything in turn, now from the perspective of humans and now from that of various nonhumans, without “always being fixed in the human one.” Operating in this way, actor-network researchers do indeed show postphenomenology an approach for “elucidat[ing] the networks of relations that allow entities to be present.” But, adds Verbeek, postphenomenologists are philosophers, not social scientists; hence, when all is said and done, they want to understand specifically, “from the inside out,” how all of this matters for us and what specific modes of being-in-the-world are open to us, given the network of relations Latour helps us describe.

Robert Scharff ’s essay offers a critical response to the postphenomenological movement. While he encourages its “empirical turn” insofar as it promises to shed detailed light on how it actually is (in Mitcham’s phrase) to “be-with technology,” he argues that its proponents purchase this turn with an unnecessary and costly misunderstanding of Heidegger. Typically, they (as well as Feenberg, see Chapter 31) reject Heidegger’s later critique of technology as abstract and dystopian, and try to salvage something from his earlier conception of being-in-the-world. However, Scharff argues that those who embrace this interpretation tend to weaken their own philosophical outlook by accepting it. In fact, objections to Heidegger’s alleged pessimism and dystopianism are best interpreted as evidence of a widespread tendency – found among both postpositivist and phenomenological writers about technoscience – to overestimate the degree to which they themselves have left behind a late Enlightenment or classical positivist understanding of our age.

Scharff develops this point by discussing the work of Ihde, Verbeek, and Feenberg. His main argument is that they are wrong to assume that Heidegger would force them to choose between an “empirical turn” and what Ihde calls a total, “one size fits all” condemnation of technoscientific life. The mistake is traceable to a misunderstanding of Heidegger’s claim that he seeks a critical account of the “essence” of technology, where it is assumed that he is using the term in a traditional, or neo-Aristotelian way to mean “timeless characteristic” or “necessary property.” Scharff points out that Wesen in German is a verb or verbal noun, so that when Heidegger is describing technology’s essence, he is referring to how things strongly and for the most part are coming to be (“essencing”), not to how they must necessarily be. The point to see, for Heidegger, is that if the essence of technology really were a timelessly universal and necessary characteristic of all technology, then we could not currently have any experience of technology as possibly “being” otherwise. Our inherited sense of how everything arrives as already “enframed” would then simply determine how we understood technoscientific life. Yet in fact, as postphenomenologists and critical social theorists themselves have shown and as Heidegger agrees, we have countless experiences that do involve a lack of fit between our inherited, enframing sense of technology as “setting up” everything in an instrumental and indiscriminately manipulable way, and our current sense of many “other” (e.g., more humanizing, or discriminating, or politically productive) possibilities. To illustrate the point, Scharff quotes a passage from Hubert Dreyfus’ On the Internet (a partial version of which is included in this anthology, Chapter 53), and shows how one can read his account of the Web in either an essentialist and deterministic way or as descriptive of a now hegemonic, default understanding of how engaging with the Web tends to corrupt and flatten out our sense of life’s meaning. Dreyfus clearly desires to be read the second way, because like Heidegger, he wants us to focus precisely on our unsatisfying experiences of this default understanding in order to see in their “discomforting” effects on us a source of alternative possibilities. Scharff concludes that postphenomenology is not nearly as “post-” Heideggerian as it thinks it is. The next step, he says, is to get over the idea that one must chose between the concrete, technologies-focused research of the phenomenologists and critical social theorists, and Heidegger’s current reflective consideration of the current pervasive repressiveness of the developed world’s current technoscientific atmosphere. In fact, he concludes, they should be pursued together.