# Positivist and Postpositivist Philosophies of Science
## Introduction

Perhaps in keeping with the popular idea that philosophy simply begins by critically evaluating some marked-off "field" of inquiry (e.g., ethics, art, mind, law, language), many investigations of technology, too, have defined themselves by identifying technological topics and practices that seem to raise philosophical "issues." As the selections in Parts II and III suggest, however, this approach has become increasingly unpopular, in part because it tends to result in inquiries that remain silent about what counts as "technology" in the first place, and in part because the crucial question of the relation between technology and science is never asked. The latter failure is especially significant, because many of the current debates over technology rest upon oversimplified or outdated conceptions of science. Optimistic and "pro-technology" writings often presuppose fairly crude, positivistic visions of science and oversimplified conceptions of the objectivity of scientific knowledge. Social constructionist and "critical" writings on technology often assume equally crude, anti-positivistic conceptions of science and tend to reduce scientific knowledge claims to mere functions of societal or cultural "consensus."

With the decline of the influence of positivism on the philosophy of science in recent decades, however, there have emerged a number of sophisticated reinterpretations of science and scientific knowledge. After the first selection, the readings in this section are representative of these recent developments; and it will become plain in the sections that follow that these post- and non-positivist philosophies of science have opened up new and more nuanced possibilities for the evaluation of technology and its place in culture.

During the first two-thirds of the twentieth century, logical positivism and its more qualified successor, logical empiricism, dominated the philosophy of science, particularly in England and North America. Viewed epistemologically, logical positivism famously and explicitly combines Bacon's empiricism with twentieth-century developments in mathematical logic. In addition, because this kind of epistemology appears to entail hostility toward speculative theorizing and is often accompanied by an emotivist position in ethics, it has been widely assumed that logical positivists and logical empiricists do not espouse any general historical theory concerning scientific and general intellectual progress. Indeed, several members of the movement, following John Stuart Mill's lead, explicitly reject the classical positivism of Comte, first, for failing to develop a formal, rational reconstruction of the scientific method and second, for embracing a speculative philosophy of history based on an empirically suspect "law of three stages" of intellectual development. 

In fact, however, the twentieth-century positivists' allegedly anti-speculative and purely epistemic stance is shown to be something of a myth. Like Comte, only silently, the Vienna Circle manifesto "The Scientific Conception of the World" exhibits the same militant opposition to traditional religious and metaphysical reasoning, the same conviction of the superiority of scientific rationality, and the same assumption that social and political progress depend upon the acquisition and technical-social engineering application of scientific knowledge. The influence of these assumptions in the debates over the use and importance of technology will, of course, emerge in many of the later selections. For the moment, it might be noted that both Comte and Marx, for all the differences in their projected political programs, share with twentieth-century positivists the same optimistic and progressivistic picture of a world improved through the employment of scientific knowledge. Marx, we recall, envisioned the rise of a “scientific” socialism.

Beginning the late 1950s and early 1960s, new approaches to the philosophy of science arose in Anglo-American philosophy, influenced by Wittgenstein’s later writings and by a burgeoning interest in the history of science. Together with Kuhn’s Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), a whole spate of works by those selfidentifying as “postpositivist” philosopher of science (e.g., Stephen Toulmin, Norwood Russell Hanson, Michael Scriven, Michael Polanyi, Mary Hesse, and Paul Feyerabend) displayed interests in history, psychology, the logic of discovery, and theoretical modeling, none of which had been considered part of “real” philosophy of science by the logical positivists. Together, their whole generation demonstrated that the very idea of a philosophical investigation of science had changed. Kuhn’s book was by far the most influential – not only among philosophers, but in the sociology of science and even with the general public – in comparison to the works of other post-positivists. His concept of a “paradigm” – that is, a worldview that guides the understanding of scientific activity, above all in its theorizing, but often also in relation to experimental technique, the ideal of a good theory, and even regarding metaphysical assumptions about fundamental entities or processes – became a buzzword in fields from architecture to business administration, psychotherapy, and self-help groups. (In their Princeton home, the Kuhns hung a crocheted sampler stitched with “God Bless Our Little Paradigm,” honoring the role this notion played in paying for the house.) Part of Kuhn’s appeal was that he not only demonstrated the relevance of the history of science for any philosophical understanding of science, but portrayed that history as resembling the history of art and religion, where a succession of overarching visions or styles replace one another. Ironically, historians of art and religion in turn borrowed Kuhnian imagery to purchase second-hand the “scientific” prestige long denied them by positivists. In either case, the door was now wide open for future philosophers (some of them represented in other selections in this anthology) to treat both science and technology as human practices with historical and social contexts.

In the current selection, Kuhn discusses the “anomaly,” a notion that did not become as popular as, for example, his conceptions of “preparadigmatic science” (where various schools compete without any agreed-upon ideals or methodology), “normal science” (where scientists fill in details, solve puzzles, and extend lines of research within an unquestioned ruling paradigm), and “revolutionary science” (where a new paradigm seems to threaten an old one, philosophical arguments about the contending paradigms become important, and their adherents frequently talk past each other). Yet an anomaly, as Kuhn describes it, illustrates especially well the overall nature of his position. It is, he notes, a violation of the “paradigm-induced expectations that govern normal science.” It appears as an unexplained empirical difference between what is observed and what is theoretically expected. According to the standard positivist account, anomalies should be occasions for abandoning the theories that fail to explain them. But in fact, Kuhn notes, this is not what typically happens, and the reason is that, contrary to positivist orthodoxy, theories are never taken literally, or strictly, or as if they were like perfectly well-formed propositions. Hence, unexplained cases of various sorts are always being tolerated, no matter how strongly held the relevant theory. Yet there has to be a limit to this tolerance, or else no theory would ever be abandoned, but only endlessly modified by the addition of ad hoc hypotheses and redefinitions. And of course, this also is not what happens.

There is a long history of puzzlement over the anomaly problem. Kuhn himself never arrived at an entirely clear account, and soon after the appearance of Structure, amidst the heated philosophical controversies over the book and in the face of its unintended popular association with the political radicalism and counterculture of the 1960s, Kuhn retreated from any further consideration of such problems. Nevertheless, the implications of his account ultimately proved devastating to the logical positivist approach to science. Not only had he challenged its formalized reconstruction of scientific reasoning by “contextualizing” the whole process; he also showed that the basic idea that science is in the business of verifying or refuting theories is empirically inaccurate. To put it briefly, Kuhn’s account of the overthrow of a paradigm shows that it is not so much an accumulation of counterexamples or refutations as it is an accumulation of anomalies. Moreover, Kuhn’s work not only led to the demise of logical positivism, it also helped launch the sociology of scientific knowledge movement of the British Bath and Edinburgh schools (see Pickering and Latour in Part III). Kuhn himself did not make the social contextualization of scientific practice a central issue; indeed he only mentions in passing that external social factors figure in paradigm shifts (e.g., the demand for better colanders in the time of Copernicus). Yet in retrospect, the social, historical, and cultural implications of his work fairly leap off the page for those not invested in constraining the philosophy of science and technology to the formal analysis of its reasoning. Hence, the theme Kuhn barely broached and then dropped like a hot potato was eagerly grasped by others. For if inductive support and logical refutation did not account for changes in theories, then the obvious place to turn for explanations of these changes would be to all the extra-logical features of scientific practice.

In his treatment of the famous problem of scientific “realism,” Ian Hacking displays several features of the postpositivist turn away from traditional philosophy of science. For all its nuanced exploration over literally centuries, the problem boils down to this. If knowledge is possible, must we not have assurances that at least some of what we say about the world “really represents” it? For both logical positivists and for Kuhn, the solution to this problem, in or out of science, must come from our discovering how to certify the representativeness of at least some of our theories. Hence their focus is, respectively, on the nature and history of theories, their construction, and their certification. Hacking, however, does not share this assumption. Citing Bacon, he reminds us that it is experimental interference with the course of nature that leads to scientific theorizing, not the reverse. Hacking’s aim is to turn the philosophical conversation toward experimentation and away from an epistemological focus on theory, explanation, and prediction. Scientists, he asserts, are realists about entities, not about theories. It is the use of entities to manipulate other entities rather than the role of entities in a theory that leads experimental physicists to believe in the reality of objects like the electron. It is a tool for doing, not thinking. Hence, instead of treating the electron in the traditional philosophical way, as a puzzling, unobservable “theoretical entity,” we should think of scientific investigations that employ electron microscopes, where our confidence that electrons are “real” is a function of their making visible to us something even more “hypothetical” and unobservable than electrons. (Indeed, he says, “I blush” at the way we usually throw around words like “observe” and “see.” Dewey should have taught us by now to recognize such rigid designation of these terms as just another version of philosophy’s mythological “Spectator Theory of Knowledge.”) In short, he concludes, “We are completely convinced of the reality of electrons when we regularly set out to build – and often enough succeed in building – new kinds of devices that use various well understood causal properties of electrons to interfere in other more hypothetical parts of nature.”

Adopting scientific (or “entity”) realism also puts to rest another philosophically created dilemma, namely, the apparently changing “reference” for theoretical entities over time. To clarify this issue, Hacking appeals to Hilary Putnam’s “referential theory of meaning.” As in a dictionary, where “how” a word denotes “what” it does can be vague or precise, stereotypical or technical, and change over time, so in science, “how” we think about some physical entity often changes while reference to “the entity” remains constant. Hence, it is not necessary that, historically, all scientists have been consistent (or even right!) about what “electron” means. “Once upon a time,” he says, it even “made good sense to doubt that there are electrons.” In the nineteenth century, many scientists and philosophers justifiably regarded atoms as fictional entities, for although the concept of the atom could be used successfully in theoretical explanations and predictions, there was no way to experimentally manipulate them. In the early twentieth century, however, atoms came be treated as real because they could be used to investigate other entities. (A more recent example that Hacking describes in detail is the use of electrons in investigating neutral bosons. At least at the time that Hacking was writing, neutral bosons, on the other hand, were considered hypothetical insofar as they could not be manipulated to experiment on other “still more hypothetical” entities.) Of course, admits Hacking, it always remains permissible for philosophers, perched high above the laboratory technician and the field researcher, to see nothing here but pure instrumentalism. Yet if actual scientists were not realists about the entities that they use in order to investigate other hypotheses or hypothetical entities, “their enterprise would be incoherent.”

It is probably fair to say that Hacking has fewer followers than readers. Critics have complained that his “realism about unobservables” remains an incurably elusive idea, and some argue that if the final test for scientific realism is scientific practice, then recent developments in theoretical physics suggest that even his kind of realism is losing ground to a more robust anti-realism. Nevertheless, in several important respects Hacking’s postpositivism is widely recognized as strongly foreshadowing developments to come. For one thing, as he turns away from the positivist emphasis on scientific theorizing toward experimental practice, he also implicitly drops his angle of vision from the universal and ahistorically conceived epistemic “problems” of the old orthodoxy to the level of actual scientific practices, where so much more is at stake than formulating warrantable assertions and making predictions, and where no one imagines that that something like physical science could be, as Richard Rorty puts it, a “natural kind” (see Rouse, below). Together with Kuhn’s historical contextualization of scientific thinking, Hacking’s emphasis on experimentation encourages the recasting of traditional philosophy of science into the social and cultural study of science as a human practice represented in numerous other selections. Moreover, the new focus on science as a practice encourages making connections with other philosophical topics that the positivist tradition could make seem irrelevant by limiting philosophy of science to the analysis of “the structure of scientific explanation.” Thus Don Ihde (see Chapter 46) praises Hacking’s “instrumental realism” for tying science much more closely to technology than previous twentieth-century views. For in Hacking, technology appears not as the vehicle for applying scientific knowledge, but as it functions in (and often even makes possible) scientific research. For Ihde and the postphenomenologists, as well as Latour and other social constructivists, this seems to justify their use of the term “technoscience” as a replacement for “science and technology.” Finally, although the writings of Kuhn, Toulmin, and other early postpositivist philosophers are still strongly marked by polemics against their predecessors, the feminist philosophies of science that began to emerge about 10 years later more often simply begin where these thinkers left off. For if Toulmin and Kuhn and others are right – that is, if scientific theories are neither direct, Baconian-empiricist reports of the facts nor purely neutral, logical empiricist-like formal machines for making scientific predictions – if, instead, they are explanatory systems grounded in idealizing presuppositions and global paradigms that are often neither explicit nor articulated, then it is important to ask what kinds of attitudes, worldviews, and biases are likely to enter even the best scientific theories and methodologies. In particular, feminist philosophers have argued for the existence of a “masculine” bias toward understanding scientific research – one that privileges the detached, experimental manipulation of objects and thereby fosters the neglect of aspects of nature that might nevertheless be revealed to science through other approaches. Nancy Tuana’s recent survey of feminist philosophy of science identifies the influence of such masculine orientations and describes feminist alternatives on topics ranging from primate research and theories of human evolution to general attitudes toward the scientific epistemology (where, e.g., “neutrality” is nothing of the kind). She argues that the social studies of science movement is showing us not only how to develop more inclusive conceptions of scientific practice, but how to ask questions – philosophical questions, not “merely” psychological or sociological questions the logical empiricists tried to reduce them to – questions “that reflect the location of science within society and the relationships between power and knowledge.”

In tracing out the demise of mid-twentieth-century philosophy of science, especially in the United States, it is worth remembering that before logical positivism came to dominate North American philosophy, an indigenous philosophy of pragmatism had already developed a richer alternative conception of the scientific method. The classical American pragmatists (e.g., William James, C.S. Peirce, and Dewey) did not share the positivists’ Baconian/British empiricist conception of experience, which they regarded as poverty-stricken. “British Empiricism,” James famously quipped, “is not very empirical.” For these pragmatists, “experience” can be something as broad and complex as the reflective discovery of a mental habit or social dilemma, or something as narrow and measurable as the passive registration of sense data. Not surprisingly, given this experiential pluralism, they displayed much greater tolerance toward the idea that what the “scientific method” is and does cannot be reduced to one standard description.

With the waning of the influence of classical American pragmatism, especially after World War II, only its more narrowly instrumentalist, naturalistic, and manipulative strains were taken seriously and absorbed into American logical empiricism, which was inclined to view all scientific inquiry on the model of nineteenthcentury experiments in physics. Pragmatism’s richer social and contextual notions of scientific research were largely ignored by the Anglo-American mainstream until the early 1980s, when postpositivists like Rorty and Putnam began to draw again upon the work of James and Dewey in order to express their growing displeasure with the narrow and dated character of the positivist epistemologies they had inherited, and when the work of Dewey himself began to experience something of a revival (see Hickman, Chapter 34).

In the meantime, in Germany and much of Continental Europe, logical empiricism enjoyed a much shorter and less dominant run. By the first two decades of the twentieth century, an influential alternative approach to the understanding of the methods of science had already been developed. Drawing first on Dilthey’s argument for separate epistemologies in “natural” and “human” science, and later on Husserl’s phenomenological conception of irreducibly different “regions” of reality and on Heidegger’s conception of philosophy as hermeneutics (i.e., as the ontologically appropriate interpretation of the lived-through “meaning” of what we encounter and how we encounter it), “hermeneuticalphenomenological” philosophy of science was originally conceived specifically as an alternative to the positivists’ formal, “rationally reconstructive” mono-methodological picture of science and scientific theory. This alternative, it was argued, was necessary especially in the historical and social human sciences, where the focus is often on unique individuals and where even generalizing accounts of human phenomena are more concerned with understanding what actions “mean” to people than with finding what “causes” them or with making predictions about future actions. Eventually, however, the scope of hermeneutics was widened to accommodate a philosophical reconsideration of all science, not just human science, and by the end of the last century a hermeneutics of natural science and of science generally had been extensively developed. Patrick Heelen and Jay Schulkin’s article gives a particularly lucid exposition of these developments, as well as a very helpful comparison of the hermeneutical conception of science with that of pragmatism.

The social and contextual aspects of science are also stressed by the French philosopher and sociologist of science, Bruno Latour, who complains that the very idea of an opposition or separation of “science” from its “society” involves a false dichotomy. Though Latour is represented in more detail later in this collection (see Chapter 25), some features of his work and that of the recent French tradition generally need to be mentioned here to provide background for the remaining selections in this section. Especially important is Bruno’s insistence that there is as much society within science as without. In his earlier work, Latour presents a kind of anthropology of scientific laboratories, but more recently he has moved toward developing a generalized actor network theory (ANT). Latour’s work, highly influential in science studies in the United States, popularizes (often without crediting) Michel Foucault’s power-network interpretations of human activities (see Chapter 54) and the deconstructive techniques of Jacques Derrida. He employs the latter to undermine numerous oppositions assumed in traditional studies of science and technology – for example, that between science and technology. Using the term coined by Gaston Bachelard in the 1960s, “technoscience,” and transforming the subtle and difficult prose of Derrida into a jokey and cartoon-filled presentation, Latour proceeds by recounting scientific and technological case studies. His approach, like that of the social constructivists excerpted elsewhere in this anthology, has been criticized in the so-called science wars for rejecting the reality of the objects of science. Latour wittily rejects this accusation as a red herring and insightfully suggests that the contemporary science wars replay in a crude fashion the debates of Plato’s Gorgias between Truth and political power.

Finally, the post-Kuhnian, pragmatic, phenomenological, and hermeneutic approaches to science raise questions, not only about the place of science within the larger culture (explored by Rouse) but about the relation of Western science to traditional or indigenous science in the non-Western world. If there are no clear demarcations between science and non-science as both the logical positivists and Karl Popper insisted, then indigenous knowledge cannot be sharply demarcated from science, and science itself might better come to be seen as particularly powerful form of “local knowledge,” involving tacit skills, traditions, and rituals. The final two selections of this section, by Sandra Harding and Shigehisa Kuriyama, succinctly raise a number of issues concerning the claim of Western science to universality and superiority.

In the excerpt from Engaging Science: How to Understand Its Practices Philosophically, Joseph Rouse introduces another distinctive alternative to positivist philosophy of science, namely, “cultural studies of science,” which he characterizes as a loose, multidisciplinary association of research programs, with diverse contributions coming from history, philosophy, social science, political and feminist theory, and literary criticism. Born in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when the demise of positivist philosophy of science was already well under way, cultural studies is defended by Rouse for having followed a somewhat different trajectory from that of the two other movements already mentioned. Postpositivism (in the narrower sense often used by historians of the period) came in the wake of Kuhn and is comprised of “proponents of internalist history and philosophy of science” – by which Rouse means to stress that they tend to be revisionists, bent on finding a better and more contextualized way to do what their predecessors had done poorly, namely, analyze the nature of scientific knowledge, its procedures, and its warrantability or legitimation, so to speak “from within.” Rouse traces the second movement – that is, social constructivism – back to Bloor’s “Strong Programme” in the sociology of science, stressing that by focusing on the contingent and informal character of actual scientific practice, it made itself an opponent to postpositivism’s continuation of the traditional internal vs. external distinction for characterizing the content vs. context of scientific reasoning. Yet as Rouse sees it, for all their differences, both movements still debate – as reverse images of each other – the same three basic problems of positivist orthodoxy, namely, establishing the rational authority of scientific claims, settling the realist–antirealist dispute regarding claims about the natural world, and defending the normativity of philosophy’s own pronouncements about science. Postpositivism still thinks all three problems can be solved; social constructivism argues that they cannot. But cultural studies, says Rouse, regards the debate itself as badly framed.

After this preliminary differentiation of cultural studies of science from the two other movements, Rouse presents three historical vignettes designed to acknowledge both cultural studies’ indebtedness to (but ultimate displeasure with) social constructivism, and also their solidarity with the long tradition of politically motivated self-criticism among scientists themselves. Finally, he identifies six common themes in terms of which he explains what makes cultural studies of science distinctive – which, he concludes, is really their fundamental rejection of the whole philosophical framework silently taken for granted by both postpositivists and social constructivists. First, cultural studies are anti-essentialist about science. Here, he says, they have learned from social constructivism, whose research shows conclusively the irreducible historical variability of the character of scientific reasoning, its methods, norms, and goals. Moreover, the social constructivists are right that this variability is not merely “external,” as if it were only a variability about the public meaning of science while “science itself ” continues timelessly trying to do the same thing. Second, however, cultural studies of science are not “explanatory” in the way that social constructivists, who after all see themselves as scientists of science, tend to view their own accounts. Like all scientists, they tend to assume that theirs is the definitive perspective, and as a result, social constructivists reify their interpretations of science in two ways – first by perpetuating the objectivistic attitude of the positivists who also thought they were providing the authoritative interpretation of the sciences as they “really” are; and second, by allowing this delusion about their own authoritativeness to discourage reflection on the contingent, sociocultural circumstances of their own standpoint and concept selection. Third, cultural studies stress the “local, material, and discursive character” of scientific practice, which marks their dissatisfaction with the tendency of both positivist and postpositivist philosophies of science to picture scientific practice as if it were “a body of free-floating ideas” detachable from the technical instruments, materials, network of researchers, special vocabularies and forms of communication, and even unwritten rules for disseminating acquired information that are always a part of actual scientific practice. (This emphasis is, of course, also shared by those philosophers of technology, for example phenomenologists and pragmatists, for whom the “materiality” of technologically mediated situations is a central concern.) Fourth, cultural studies defends what Rouse calls the “openness of scientific practices,” by which he means the process of continual give-and-take between scientific activities and the larger society. Rouse complains that this theme is underplayed both by Kuhnians and by social constructivists, all of whom focus so much on scientific practices themselves that they tend to see only the way these practices relate to the social whole, not the other way around.

Rouse’s fifth and sixth themes, taken together, outline the general philosophical benefits to be gained by taking a cultural studies stance toward science. Thus, fifth, regarding the traditional questions about the legitimation of theories, realism, and value-neutrality, cultural studies take a “subversive” rather than antagonistic stance, for the simple reason that (as we can see in the case of social constructivism) antagonists must accept the same basic ontological and epistemological rules of the game as the other parties to the debate. Above all, says Rouse, in these debates lurks the ghost of the traditional idea of finding a “global solution” to the issues – as we can see in the postpositivist interest in making normative statements about Science Überhaupt, and in the social constructivists’ equally self-deceiving conviction that they can first limit themselves to being “just descriptive” and then later go on, having already demonstrated their supposed “epistemic sovereignty,” to make authoritative recommendations. Thus sixth, says Rouse, cultural studies reject the implicitly ahistorical attitude to which both postpositivism and social constructivism still seem to aspire. Proponents of cultural studies see themselves as being just as “performative” – that is, just as much a part of the technoscientific process – as what they study, and thus as “participating in constructing reliable and authoritative knowledge of the world by critically engaging with the sciences’ practices of making meaning.” Engagement, of course, we cannot help; that it should be “critical” means that continual reflection on what one is doing as a socially and culturally engaged proponent of cultural studies is part of one’s responsibility.

Taken in the context of the previous readings, Sandra Harding’s essay makes it plain just how important and far-reaching are the implications of recognizing not just the cultural but the multicultural character of scientific practice. Harding begins, deliberately in the spirit of post-Kuhnian philosophy, by reminding us that science, taken as a complex configuration of practices, is in fact just as multicultural as the arts and humanities. Indeed, she says, the first thing to notice is that “our” allegedly “universal” science is no such thing. It is very specifically modern and “Western,” although some of its roots are neither European nor Western. In other works, Harding considers the political and social consequences of the common habit of treating Western science as the universal, neutral, and thus superior way of obtaining “knowledge” (no adjective). Here, however, she pursues the more limited goal of drawing on post-colonial studies to discredit the default position of simply defining “science” as what “we Europeans” have been doing since Descartes and Bacon. In light of what she establishes in this regard, she raises two further questions. Is European science the only practice to define its alleged universality “internally” – that is, to see it as successful because “it works,” in the sense that it accomplishes what is expected of it – or could there be other culturally specific “sciences” that also “work” and are thus “universal” in the same sense? This second question, of course, throws us back on another obvious one, namely, in what sense is modern Western science context-bound and culturally European (or European-American)?

Harding acknowledges that a multicultural standpoint on science is inescapably controversial, from the perspective of both “conventional science theorists” (she means pre-Kuhnian philosophers of science for whom all the extra-epistemological material she obtains from science studies is not part of Real Philosophy) and those who are perhaps more open to multicultural investigation but do not share Harding’s own circumstances (e.g., someone from China or Japan who might suspect her repeated references to the “West” as betraying an orientialist prejudice). Although she simply acknowledges the first objection in passing, she admits that the second has no easy answer. Mostly, she just settles for identifying numerous issues about standpoint that she has considered at greater length elsewhere, but two issues she addresses directly. First, concerning the allegation of Eurocentrism for starting with “our” alleged “universal” science, she simply acknowledges that this is actually the central question of the essay; hence, second, she admits that she necessarily addresses her question from a determinate position – that of an economically privileged insider’s perspective – and expresses hope that somehow she might nevertheless speak about it for

> all people – regardless of their ethnicity, “race,” nationality, class, gender, or other significant features of their location in local and global social relations – who are concerned to rethink critically those social relations past and present and the role of the sciences in them, and who wish to bring about more effective links between scientific projects and those of advancing democratic social relations.

The passage is quoted in full here, both to highlight her list of problems that must be faced by anyone who admits they cannot possess a completely detached and neutral standpoint, and because Kuriyama criticizes Harding’s treatment of it in his comments.

In any case, Harding criticizes the “conventional view” of European science as universal and neutral by identifying numerous concrete ways in which it reflects its specifically cultural origins and its obviously not so “strictly scientific” goals. Of course, she notes, many defenders of the superiority of Western science will admit that it has borrowed from other cultures, but that is hardly the point. Not only are the borrowings more extensive and even non-Western than such easy admissions acknowledge but many of the borrowings are not recognized at all. Harding reviews some of these (e.g., Chinese inventions, Arabic variations on ancient Greek science, Indian and Arabic mathematics, principles of pre-Columbian American botany and agriculture); but she argues that the real point is not just lack of acknowledgment but a tendency to trivialize the achievements of “other scientific traditions” by praising them only for what they gave “us.”

Regarding her second question, Harding asks if “other traditions” could rightly be said to “work.” In support of a positive reply, she notes first that a number of supposedly Western discoveries were made earlier in non-Western traditions. Moreover, she claims that there is no strict rule to distinguish Western “science” from natural knowledge in other cultures. Indeed, many features of Western science belie the claim that Western science is distinctive. In addition, there is much disagreement about the origins of Western science – that is, whether there were unique assumptions about the physical world or social relations in which milieu Western science arose – since just the ideas of a “pure” scientific method and an all-comprehending rationality alone seem insufficient to explain its development. Finally, Harding joins many Third World writers in pointing to the conspicuous connection between the rise of Western science, military conquest, economic expansion, and colonialism.

Thus, Harding joins Tuana and many others in arguing for a culturally Western rather than a historically universal conception of modern science. Research plans have often obviously been linked to European expansionism; and distinctive attitudes toward the “disenchantment” (i.e., removing spirits from our conceptions) of nature, the quest for worldly power over it, the belief that nature’s laws were originally laid down by a personal (and Biblical) god – all of these are clearly (at least) hemispheric conditions. Even “our” idea of value-neutrality and the sharp separation of facts from values are not notions generally shared by other cultures. Hence, the vaunted “universality” of Western science seems more to be a product of the conquest and domination of other cultures (and also to some extent an expression of its androcentric, religious, and locally bourgeois interests) than it is its formal insistence on explanatory successes. Every scientific epistemology seems in fact to be political. Is there not, we might ask, a Foucault-like kernel of truth in the ancient belief in word magic: Those who name the world get to control it?

One controversial claim that Harding repeats several times, however, reveals what critics of Harding’s work argue is its major weakness. There might well be, she says, alternative laws of nature to those developed by Western science. Yet her efforts to defend this view have struck many as operating at so high a level of abstraction (e.g., “alternative” in what sense and for what purposes?) that it is difficult to know how to evaluate the claim, let alone decide its plausibility. As some critics have put it, Harding has never worked out the “meta-theoretical” details of her standpoint, and this shows up above all in her tendency to focus on multiple cultures and perspectives in their multiplicity without offering any recommendations concerning how they are to be compared and evaluated. Shigehisa Kuriyama, a historian of Chinese medicine, is one such critic. Though he expresses sympathy with Harding’s intentions, he complains about multiculturalism’s tendency to describe too many things from too high an altitude. What we need, he says, is the detailed and sensitive comparison of many cultures, together with some standards for the comparisons. One need not be a traditional essentialist to criticize Harding for not providing any. To take one example, Harding’s characterization of science as knowledge of the “natural world” neglects that fact that most cultures do not distinguish “natural” from the supernatural or the artifactual in the way Western science and common culture do. (One interesting implication of Kuriyama’s objection: Does it apply also to all those phenomenologists and postphenomenologists who speak about technological “embodiment” as if there were a descriptive level at which being embodied is not yet “cultural”? Is there?) Kuriyama also worries that Harding’s multiculturalism obscures the difficulty of borrowing across separate traditions. Although she does list many of the extraepistemological factors involved in any scientific practice, she is silent about the difficulties in speaking, exchanging information, and making plans of action cross-culturally that will be inevitable even in a relatively stylized practice like scientific research. “Knowledge,” as Kuriyama puts it (using the example of acupuncture and Western puzzlement over its “medical” status), “can travel poorly.” At the very least, we need some help with questions like what makes a science a “science” (given the world’s wildly different current conceptions of “knowledge”); or what it means to say that all science seeks “systematic knowledge of the natural world” (when the very idea of “natural” is distinctively modern and Western and currently contested even there); or to say that science must “work” (when it is only in the developed West where one quite spontaneously assumes that this is a pragmatic and instrumentalist idea).

Finally, Kuriyama worries that, however well intentioned, multiculturalism’s repeated emphasis on uncovering Western bias – by multiculturalists who, like Harding, are by and large Western – risks reinforcing Western self-absorption. What are we to say when praise for the marvels of Egyptian trigonometry, the Chinese compass, or Native American botany is offered primarily in light of how it contributed to Western science? How “multicultural” is this? Perhaps Kuriyama’s observation – that for a genuinely pluralistic appreciation of knowledge (or, by implication, anything else) about different cultures, there is no substitute for detailed study, by many people, over a long period of time – echoes Rouse’s “critically engaged” conception of cultural studies. For “by itself,” says Kuriyama, even “the most thoroughgoing critique of Western universalism contributes nothing.”

---
*Source: Philosophy of Technology: The Technological Condition: An Anthology, Second Edition. Edited by Robert C. Scharff and Val Dusek. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.*
---