Human Beings as “Makers” or “Tool-Users”?

ape’s skeleton, which was in fact “planted” just before World War I) gained initial acceptance in part because it appealed to many early anthropologists in suggesting that, Anaxagoras-like, the brain enlarged first in an apelike body, and then the hands evolved. Against this view, Engels insists that manual activity is the source of the evolution of brain and mind. We humans are precisely those beings that manipulate our environment through labor. Engels, of course, is especially concerned to link this priority of practical, physical activity to the Marxist view of the priority of labor, not only in human evolution but in society as well. Even language, he adds, has its origins in labor, first having developed for the purposes of social cooperation in hunting.

For quite different reasons, Lewis Mumford and Hannah Arendt both deny the priority of tool-making and labor in characterizing human nature. Arendt makes original use of the categories of the ancients to criticize Marx and to present her own understanding of human action. In contrast to the post-World War II Marxist humanists, she does not distinguish between a “true” Marx and the allegedly distorted interpretation by Marxists of humans as laboring animals. Marx himself, she argues, is simply ambivalent about the concept of labor. In some of his writings, it is a positive thing – a creative and thoroughly human activity. In other writings, it is a negative, onerous burden to be eliminated as far as possible. Arendt claims that to understand the issue properly, one must distinguish labor from both work and (communicative) action. “Labor” is the basic activity for the maintenance of life, from the labor of childbirth through the cleaning and maintenance of the household and the feeding of the family. In contrast, “work” involves the construction of artifacts – the introduction into the world of the fruits of an artisan’s skill. Whereas, for example, household labor (cleaning, cooking) has no tangible, permanent, observable product, work is purposively directed toward a physical product that it creates. Finally, “action” – that is, communicative activity and in particular, political speech in the public forum – is like labor in that it produces no tangible artifact, but like work, is purposively directed toward specific goals. According to Arendt, in the modern world of mass production, divisions of labor, and the planned obsolescence of whatever is produced, work tends to collapse into mere labor, and political action disappears along with the loss of a genuine sense of the political.

For Arendt, as for Plato and Aristotle, human nature expresses its highest capacities in contemplation and communicative action, not in labor and work. But today, both contemplation and action have been expunged by the world of labor.

Mumford also opposes those who would interpret human activity primarily in terms of the use of tools and the production of artifacts, but for a different reason. He wants to emphasize the way human activity operates on and through the human body. Mumford claims that the anthropological preoccupation with tools and tool-making is in part a function of the sheer durability of the materials used to make these tools, in contrast to the relative paucity of the more fragile records of speech and ritual and non-durable objects such as clothing. Mumford urges us to remember how much human activity was (and is) directed toward the body itself, for instance in dance and in decoration. Moreover, the earliest human “machines” were in fact not physical artifacts but organized forces of huge numbers of laborers – what he calls “megamachines” – brought together for the purpose of building canals, pyramids, and other vast construction projects. Like many other twentieth-century thinkers, Mumford argues that it is language, or more generally symbolization, not tools and cooperative labor, that most clearly distinguishes humans from other animals. For us, he argues, the tool is only significant when linked with human symbolic creativity. At first glance, Mumford’s conclusion may seem to have gained further plausibility in recent years from the discovery of considerable simple tool-use by animals. Not only chimps, but even insects and crabs appear to use twigs, pebbles, sponges and other tools. Upon closer consideration, however, these discoveries prove little about the relative importance of tool-use for humans. Our tool-making and tool-using – like our language – are recursive and creative in a way that is not the case with other animals. Humans typically devise tools to make tools to make more tools …

Is there, then, any satisfying answer to the question of whether contemplation, or tool-using, or … best represents what it is to be human? As Larry Hickman explains, for John Dewey the answer appears to be No. Dewey rejects the very idea of abstractly identifying and rank ordering human capacities; indeed, he argues that as long as human experience is considered beholden to some epistemic or metaphysical theory that embraces antecedent and superior certitudes about us or the world, the role of technology in human affairs will never be properly understood. Whether it is the ancient metaphysics of contemplation, or some form of supernaturalism, or the official view of modern scientific theory as conceptually transcending all the messy particularities of its materials and instruments – all of these lofty, “foundationalist” images of knowing and being have the double effect of inflating the importance of theoretical conceptualization and denigrating material practice in a way that distorts the real character of both activities.

It is when we begin with what Dewey calls experienced “situations” rather than with a context-freed theory of knowledge or of the objects of such knowledge, that we see what can properly be said about technical human activity, namely, that it is “inquiry” – something that “reflective organisms” do in order to “adapt” to or “alter” their environment to achieve satisfying conditions. When we are not behaving habitually and spontaneously, that is, when a “problem of use or enjoyment” occurs in a situation, we “intervene” and “experiment” with new ways of conceiving, materially handling, or socially organizing what we encounter. Hickman’s use of Darwinian language is deliberate. Dewey is a philosophical naturalist and instrumentalist, which means that he understands inquiry as emerging within the evolutionary development of natural organisms and (as far as we know) reaching its most sophisticated form in our species’ reflective, cognitive-experimental manipulation of ideas, tools, materials, and conditions. Of course, from this point of view, the whole idea of deciding once and for all which kind of activity is most human makes no sense. Science, engineering, and sociopolitical inquiry only gain whatever “priority” they have in our affairs in light of how they matter and affect some actual practice.

In the present selection, Hickman tries to distance himself (and Dewey) from the accusation that his very broad and amorphous evolutionary conception of inquiry seems to imply the merely empty observation that all human activity is technological, insofar as it is virtually impossible to think of situations in which we use no concepts, methods, materials, artifacts, or tools. Hickman’s response has some interesting implications. To be sure, Dewey may have come to call his theory of inquiry “technology,” but actually, Hickman explains, by Dewey’s definition most human activity is not technological. Rather, much of it is either “technical” (i.e., involves non-cognitive/habitual use of tools and artifacts), or “non-instrumental and [at least minimally] cognitive” (e.g., drinking stream water from one’s hands or running away from something scary), or “non-instrumental and non-cognitive” (e.g., immediate perceivings and unconscious habitual responses like feeling joy at a sunrise or pain at stubbing a toe). It is clear what Hickman is trying to avoid with these classifications, and also in general how they serve his Deweyan aim of making technological activity an emergent evolutionary phenomenon with purely practical-instrumental aims. But from other angles, one might question the wisdom of describing human activity in such a way that practices that were once “technological” are now “merely technical.” Hickman is surely right to acknowledge that most of life is unthinking and habitual. Philosophers who insist (on presupposed “Cartesian” grounds) that we simply “must” think of all human behavior as rule-following even when no one can see it, or that it is a mark of ignorance not to have “solved” the skeptical problem, probably deserve to be the “big losers.” But do we want to stop thinking of “technical” behavior as “technological” just because it has become habitual? Are there not political and ontological dangers here – that one might, for example, begin to overestimate the power of later “cognitive and deliberate reflection” in the face of problematic “habits,” or ignore the conservative implications of embracing naturalism and instrumentalism in an already pervasively technoscientific and “developed” world?

Finally, in “Buddhist Economics,” E.F. Schumacher offers a provocative and starkly contrasting reconsideration of the proper place of technology in our lives by identifying and then reversing many of the rarely questioned assumptions about the nature and purpose of human life upon which familiar Western accounts of economics and work depend. Drawing upon the idea of “Right Livelihood” that forms part of the Buddhist conception of the Noble Eightfold Path to spiritual liberation, Schumacher shows that by Buddhist standards, the Western economic (specifically, capitalist) conception of work is ultimately, and not surprisingly, contradictory. It appears, he says, that for employers, the optimum condition would be to have output without employees, and for employees, income without employment. Ideally, then, there should be no work. The source of this conundrum, argues Schumacher, is precisely the basic Western conception of work as a necessary evil, a mere means, something instrumental only. For a Buddhist, however, work is only partially and secondarily concerned with the production of goods and services. Most importantly, work offers us the chance to develop our capacities and to overcome our ego-centeredness by cooperating in common tasks. (Although he says little about the matter here, it is clear that Buddhist teaching also has little sympathy for the Baconian idea that technoscience can give us power over our surroundings.) From this viewpoint, says Schumacher, the Western way of judging work has, unfortunately, “stood the truth on its head.”