Technology, Knowledge, and Power

Introduction

This final section focuses on several approaches to the question of the relationship between (especially scientific) knowledge and (especially technological) power, the problem of their joint social impact, and the possibility of re-orienting or transforming technology. Especially among critical social theorists and other continental philosophers, there is widespread agreement that if we simply begin by describing and analyzing the roles of science and technology in everyday existence, we risk uncritically evaluating them entirely in their own terms. For example, it is through technology that science makes its most powerful impact on our lives, but there is some danger that we will too hastily follow those like Latour, Ihde, and Verbeek who mostly conceive science and technology together as the single phenomenon, “technoscience,” and thus tend to take for granted that the influence of science and technology on our lives is best evaluated from the point at which “it” is experienced in everyday technological mediations. The problem is that this kind of philosophical approach often sidesteps the question of how science and technology are themselves already shaped by the (often undemocratic) political and economic interests that inform their combined operation in everyday affairs. For many critics (Feenberg, in this section, among them), failure to ask this prior question deprives us of an effective way to consider the kind of social planning (for which technological knowledge alone is insufficient) that would ensure a genuinely democratic implementation of technology.

To put the matter a different way, the argument is that the facts and theories of science cannot be adequately understood if one depends primarily on the familiar ideas and imagery of the contemporary lifeworld. At any given moment, technological knowledge simply empowers us to control our natural and human surroundings in whatever ways are now available to us, given the science that has been employed to make this possible. The only hope we have of determining a more “enlightened” (or, for Feenberg, “democratic”) course of action, lies in enlisting the capacity of scientific theorizing to gain some degree of reflective independence from our usual understanding of these surroundings. It is this sort of independence we need if we are to question and re-evaluate the courses of action our technologies currently induce us to pursue. In the meantime, we cannot rationally discuss the question of the optimal relations between technical progress and the social lifeworld when the whole issue remains structured by the ideologies and myths associated with the social life of our time. As all the authors in this section acknowledge in various ways (even Mesthene, who is certainly the least concerned about it), the familiar Enlightenment assumption that we can automatically associate instrumental control of technical problems with democratic freedom – an assumption that persuaded social theorists as diverse as Comte and Marx that it would just be a matter of time before the technical control of productive forces would be overseen by a democratic decision-making process – is simply mistaken.

Michel Foucault, one of the most influential social philosophers of the last several decades, maintained a lifelong concern for the rise and growing cultural dominance of scientific knowledge in all its forms; but he is known above all for his analyses of the hidden as well as overt relations of power embedded in our “discourses of knowledge” and in the political implications of these relations in human affairs. Thoroughly interdisciplinary in his procedures and choice of topics, Foucault is usually said to have gone through two (possibly three) main intellectual stages. In earlier work, he undertakes an “archeological” and historical investigation of the emergence of the modern “episteme” (i.e., general conception of rationality), and he analyzes its function as a paradigm for the sciences of both nature and human life, as well as for the more “dubious disciplines” of applied social science such as criminology, psychoanalysis and psychiatry, and education. In perhaps his most famous work of this period, The Order of Things (1966), Foucault characterizes the discontinuous history of the sciences in which epistemes succeed one another in a way that bears some resemblance to the works of Kuhn, Toulmin, and other postpositivist philosophers of science in the Anglo-American tradition.

In later works, Foucault employs what he calls a “genealogical” rather than archeological method. There, he more explicitly focuses on sociopolitical issues, and his central concern is with the largely unrecognized ways in which knowledge not only “is” power, as Bacon remarked, but also involves relationships of power that privilege some and dehumanize others. In Discipline and Punish (1975), Foucault employs his general theory of knowledge and power in the production of “technologies of the self” to show how the scientific conceptions of rationality and irrationality get utilized to classify, mold, isolate, and discipline “deviant” individuals. Foucault admits, of course, that part of the technology here is physical – for example, as it is found in the architecture of prisons and schools, including Bentham’s famous panopticon (see below). Yet he argues that to judge technology by its tools and productions is to miss its point. One gets closer to the truth by recognizing that aspect of technology which involves behavioral techniques – for example, the confession and the examination, whether in a clinical, academic, or juridical setting. Foucault’s characterization of behavioral techniques bears a striking resemblance to the descriptions of Skinnerian behavioral technology in the United States. What is equally striking, however, is the contrast between the adulation heaped upon such techniques by its academic and therapeutic advocates and Foucault’s deeply critical stance toward these same techniques. For him, too little concern has been shown for the fact that behavioral technologies need no tools and yet work powerfully on and often against people. In this emphasis on tool-free technology, Foucault clearly shares ground with Mumford, whose “megamachine” is a technological apparatus consisting in human beings, and with Ellul, who also refuses to tie “technique” to the involvement of any hardware but conceives it instead as involving the rationalization of all aspects of life for the purpose of maximizing efficiency. Some readers claim to find evidence of a third stage in Foucault’s late essays and seminars, where his focus seems to shift noticeably away from the sort of critical stance toward our present situation that he otherwise shares with people like Mumford and Ellul (and Heidegger?), and where he seems to look instead toward the question of how to respond to it – that is, how we might yet otherwise “be” in a technoscientistic world. In such places, Foucault seems to provide some basis for a postmodern ethics, in which non-traditional technologies of the self might transform our understanding of critical reflection and autonomy in ways that would enable us to mitigate the persistent presence of the effects of techniques of domination.

With his critical conception of techniques as instruments of power in the background, Foucault argues in the present excerpt from Discipline and Punish that those like Guy Debord, who characterize modern society with its professional sports and mass media as a “society of the spectacle,” are quite wrong. On the contrary, Foucault asserts, ours is a society involving mutual surveillance. For example, in ancient times architecture was arranged so that a maximum number of spectators could observe a single thing or person. In the modern carceral world, architecture is arranged (and not just in prisons!) so that the ideal is a single observer observing as many people as possible. Foucault shows how the apparently more “humane” treatment of criminals and the insane is really a more insidious form of control based on more insidious conceptions of “informed” observation and visibility. Under the old regimes of torture and inquisition, punishment was overt, physical, and administered by visible representatives of a state or royal power. Modern modes of punishment are at once less visible and more complete. By making criminals, the socially undesirable, and the insane objects of technoscientific “knowledge,” they are more effectively and totally “understood,” classified, and brought under control – not just by physical force but by hidden forms of coercion – for example, the modern juridical form of examination. One can also see this transition from ancient to modern practices of control reflected in changes in characterizations of the scientific method. For Bacon, scientific experiment verges (only metaphorically?) on a sort of torture of nature. According to Kant’s First Critique, scientific inquiry is like a judicial examination, where the scientist is a judge, putting the question to nature. Foucault was himself active in the prison liberation movement but denied that courses of action could be grounded “ethically,” in any traditional sense. His archeological and genealogical descriptions, like those of Marx in his more scientific moods, were supposedly value-free.

In his famous “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” (he answers, Yes), Langdon Winner begins by distinguishing his view of the relations between technology and society from those who conceive the relation according to the standard social science model. It is too easy, he argues, to explain present technologies in terms of antecedent conditions “on” them. Of course, social conditions obviously affect everything, but if we take (what he conceives as) Husserl’s advice and go to the technological “things themselves,” we can see that this approach distorts the character of technology in two ways. First, it encourages the familiar but mistaken assumption that technologies themselves are mere neutral things, available for use but otherwise just instruments, and thus, second, it encourages us to look in the wrong places to discover why we have and use the technologies we do. In fact, he argues, we need to see the “inherently political” character of technologies themselves. Only then will we be able to understand the often troubling patterns of development in the modern world.

It is worth noting that Winner’s line of reasoning shows clear affinities here with postphenomenologists like Verbeek, who actually cites Winner in his discussion of the “political intentionality” of technologies (see Chapter 47) and identifies his own recent coinage, the “morality of things,” as “analogous” to Winner’s idea that artifacts have politics (Moralizing Technology, 2011). There are some affinities, too, with critical social theorists like Feenberg, who agrees with Winner’s idea of technologies as socially and politically “coded” and often so in undemocratic ways (Between Reason and Experience, 2011) – although he argues at the same time that we need much more detailed analyses than Winner’s, both of the socioculturally rich “technical codes” that artifacts actually do have and also of how it might be possible to “democratize” them (see below). Although Winner does not say so, one might also think of his criticisms of the social determination of artifacts as what phenomenologists call an “ontological” critique – that is, an argument that to “be” an artifact is to be something both more and different than socially determined and merely instrumental.

One of Winner’s examples has become famous. Drawing on Robert A. Caro’s Pulitzer Prize-winning study of New York’s influential urban planner, The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York (1974), Winner reports that there were apparently elitist and even racist reasons why Moses designed low-clearance bridges – accessible to cars but not to buses – for the Long Island Expressway. In a word: no buses, no inner-city undesirables to bother upper-class life at Jones Beach. Obviously, then, Moses’ bridges “are” political. Here is one of countless cases in which the sheer presence of certain technologies, whatever they are, can coerce human behavior (as here: “Those people” will have to find somewhere else to swim). Some commentators have complained that the mere construction of the low bridges is insufficient “proof” of Winner’s accusation, especially since other explanations seem possible (e.g., low bridges simply favor the automobile, or protect nature from commercialization and industrialization, or extend progressivist cultural sympathy for the popular national park code that our architecture should honor nature). Besides, the idea that any one person, no matter how powerful, could actually be responsible for the whole affair relies on a questionable conception of social causation (the so-called – and revealingly gendered – “great man theory of history”).

However, these objections obscure Winner’s main point. Whatever Moses’ actual motive and whatever one thinks of the design of his bridges, their sheer presence as built is inextricably bound up with specific social consequences and political organization. And the fact is, many technologies obviously do express political attitudes (e.g., Cyrus McCormick’s pneumatic molding machines may have “modernized” his factory, but the point was to get rid of skilled workers who had the gall to unionize). Moreover, even when no particular political motive seems involved, the way technologies are designed, built, and organized will “produce a set of consequences logically and temporally prior to any of [their] professed uses.”

Winner’s worry, of course, is that more often than not these consequences are anti-progressive and undemocratic. (Compare McDermott’s argument below against Mesthene, whom he accuses of encouraging right-wing politics by defending an unrelievedly technocratic society, in which education, social privilege, and political power all naturally tend to be undemocratically concentrated in the hands of “experts.”) However, Winner refuses to accept the gloomy conclusion of technological pessimists. The fact that virtually all technologies, just by being the technologies they are, affect our ways of ordering human life does not mean that the sociopolitical determination of artifacts is “deterministic” in the hopelessly full sense. Sometimes, he notes, a configuration may seem “required,” but often it is only “strongly compatible with” one specific sociopolitical arrangement. Indeed, even when it does seem more or less required, the overall sociopolitical arrangement is typically set up not just automatically or with one choice (e.g., to build a large transmission line for electric power), but by means of numerous further decisions through which the course of its development is facilitated or could be altered (e.g., the line’s route, location of generators, height and appearance of the towers). Citing Engels’ “On Authority” (see Chapter 8), Winner points out that it also matters how carefully an arrangement – especially an arrangement with a “distinctive political cast” – is considered at the beginning, before its sheer presence takes on a life of its own, and thus at a time when the traditional temptations to, say, centralize authority for efficiency’s sake might be most effectively – and democratically – dealt with. In short, Winner’s discussion is rich with examples and distinctions of what should be considered in the choosing of our technologies – so much so that some readers have protested that it is no longer clear what Winner would have us do, or even how far he thinks we are free to do it. Nevertheless, he does succeed in fleshing out his central point. Our technologies may leave us with a wider or a narrower effective range of choice, but in making the choices that we have, it is important to consider not only their social and political contexts but the technologies themselves – if, that is, we are to successfully “salvage the autonomy of politics from the bind of practical [i.e., technological] necessity.”

Emmanuel Mesthene’s upbeat account of the social impact of technological change and John McDermott’s acerbic response to him have come to constitute a classical exchange in the evaluation of modern technology. In “Technology and Wisdom” Mesthene, the director of the early and short-lived Harvard University Program on Technology and Society, presents with admirable openness and clarity the attitude that often lies less candidly acknowledged behind pro-technological writing. There are, says Mesthene, no longer any real limits to what we can do with nature or ourselves. The notion of physical impossibility – the “sheer rock-bottomness of nature” – has been overcome. Previous societies always labored under some notion of cosmic or divine impediment – for instance, a surd universe of matter, a chaotic cosmic substratum (e.g., Plato’s receptacle), arbitrary but unavoidable fate as in Greek tragedy, or original sin as in Christian theology. Modern science, however, makes everything transparent and understandable (recall the logical empiricists’ “Scientific Conception of the World” in Chapter 9: “There are no depths … Everything is accessible”). Nothing, as Mesthene sees it, is incomprehensible or uncontrollable. (One might note in passing that quantum mechanics, chaos theory, and anti-reductionistic claims concerning biology may all raise doubts about Mesthene’s thesis, but the point to stress is that his attitude, accurate or not, prereflectively guides the great majority of advocates of technological progress and technocracy.) In the end, then, given the conceptual power of scientific understanding, there is nothing to stop unlimited technological development. In fact, says Mesthene, we have not and will not stop technological development because it is an expression of our humanity. Hence, those who urge technological caution are guilty of the same sort of “failure of nerve” that beset the Hellenistic world.

In his symposium contribution to the Fourth Annual Report of his Harvard program (from which the second part of our selection comes), Mesthene positions himself between optimistic technological utopians and pessimistic technological dystopians, but also argues against traditionalists who claim that modern technologies raise no new issues concerning the human condition. The simple fact is, he asserts, that new technologies open new possibilities and put within reach other possibilities that were previously too costly and difficult to realize. Thus, inevitably, technology changes the range and weightings of our possibilities, and the only proper response to this fact is to cease clinging to some given set of supposedly permanent values and embrace instead the process of “valuation” called for by each new circumstance. (To what extent, we might ask, does Mesthene’s position resemble Dewey’s instrumentalism? See Chapter 34.) As for the political consequences of this state of affairs, Mesthene claims that, in some ways, it fosters democracy (for example, with the promise of instant voting, or, more importantly, by making closer and more organized forms of cooperation necessary). At the same time, he holds that our understanding of what democracy is will necessarily have to undergo development. For example, democracy can no longer be as “direct” as traditional theory depicts it. Technological change encourages us to produce an ever-better-educated public, but nothing can stop the inevitably widening gap between technological experts who guide policy and citizens who are supposed to set it. “No amount of participation [in government] in the populist sense,” says Mesthene, “can substitute for the expertise and decision-making technologies that modern government must use.” Nevertheless, he adds, the presentation of facts by experts in, say, economics and international affairs will tend to increase consensus by removing issues from controversy.

It is Mesthene’s view of the political consequences of technological development upon which McDermott seizes. In “Technocracy: The Opiate of the Intellectuals” (which started life as a review of Mesthene’s 1970 book, Technological Change: Its Impact on Man and Society), he calls Mesthene’s arguments – for all their soothing rhetoric about a “new democratic ethos” – the straightforward defense of a politically right-wing, technocratically elitist position. As Mesthene himself seems at times to realize, the society he envisions is fundamentally dependent on expert social scientific and business management opinion and is therefore increasingly without need of popular support or participation. McDermott coins the phrase, laissez innover, to describe Mesthene’s kind of ideology of technocracy. Just as laissez faire was never a genuine description of real economies with their monopolies and government favors but rather an ideology to support entrepreneurs against employees, so the doctrine of laissez innover is designed, not to liberate technological creativity from old-fashioned doubts but to free technocrats and their economic masters from popular restraint or regulation. In order to illustrate the increasingly undemocratic and expert-dependent character of the world Mesthene embraces, McDermott contrasts the ultrarationality of strategic bombing during the Vietnam War with the myths created by uninformed and dismayed ground troops who could not understand why they were being beaten by a technologically inferior indigenous force. In a striking exemplification of the general argument of Habermas, Marcuse, and the critical social theorists, McDermott shows how, contrary to Mesthene’s rosy picture of an ever-better-educated population, technological “rationality” at the top breeds “irrationality” and fear among the populace. In his brief retrospective, McDermott reaffirms his conviction that technology is still as central to our world and as problematically related to democratic interests as it was when he wrote “Technology.” If anything, the separation of a technocratic class from the “masses” is even greater today, and laissez innover, instead of constituting an ideological replacement for laissez faire, has simply merged with it in a new, more technologized understanding of “the Market” and its “requirements.” (Might we also compare McDermott’s account of Vietnam-era computerized bombing runs and today’s worldwide drone attacks?)

Andrew Feenberg’s “Democratic Rationalization” combines criticism of technological determinism with a call for the democratization of technology and concludes with a summary of the criticisms of Heidegger’s account of technology that he elaborates in his selection in Part IV (Chapter 31). Feenberg touches upon many of the themes in previous selections. He rejects the deterministic, “unilinear” picture of the course of technology (e.g., Heilbroner, Chapter 37). He also rejects Max Weber’s view that technological rationalization makes industrial democracy impossible – a view which he claims to find in both Heidegger and Ellul and which is sketched in simple terms in Engels’ “On Authority” (see Chapter 8). Feenberg appeals to the social constructivism of Pinch and Bijker (see Chapter 24), arguing that it is only “decontextualized” conceptions of technology that can make it appear to be the self-generating foundation of modern society. A closer, more ground-level look at technology in its actual social and cultural setting reveals that its development is in fact multi-directional, not unilinear, and its course is “overdetermined” by and variously adaptive to both technical and societal demands.

Feenberg argues that his non-deterministic position cannot help being political, since if there are no predetermined “technological imperatives,” then technology needs to be interpreted, and the choices it embodies and makes possible need to be made explicit and evaluated. Here, Feenberg gives the social constructivists’ method of interpretive flexibility a hermeneutic twist. It is not how technology functions but what its objects are taken to be that requires illumination. In his language, to focus exclusively on the “design” of technological devices ignores the way every design incorporates a “technical code” that reflects, often in undemocratic ways, what is supposed to be valued and privileged (but thus could be recoded to reflect other, more democratic concerns). Feenberg identifies “social meaning” and “cultural horizon” as the two hermeneutical dimensions of technical artifacts. Computer hackers obviously exemplify one way that users of technical objects reinterpret and modify their social meaning. (One might also think of how cell phones have recently become revolutionary devices in the Middle East.) Similarly, the AIDS patients’ movement transformed the way medical drug treatment and experimentation are understood. As regards the cultural horizon, Feenberg points out that in Foucault’s theory of “power/knowledge,” modern forms of oppression are shown to depend on alleged “truths” of a technical frame of understanding the maintains its dominance precisely by not being recognized as the contingent, chosen cultural image of technical control that it is.

Feenberg closes by complaining that, from the level of abstraction maintained by people like Heidegger, the specific character of today’s technology cannot appear – with the result that it can then seem to be a “metaphysical condition,” instead of the result of a particular social hegemony that it really is.