# Introduction

Most philosophers of technology would probably agree that, for good or (at least as often) for ill, Martin Heidegger’s interpretation of technology, its meaning in Western history, and its role in contemporary human affairs is still the single most influential position in the field. The selections in this part, first from Heidegger himself and then from a sampling of his readers, introduce some lines of his influence that also anticipate discussions in subsequent sections.

Heidegger’s consideration of technology spans some 40 years, but his core position is found in the article reprinted here. It treats technology (and its association with science) in a way that opens up what Heidegger initially called his “question of the meaning of Being.” In his view, the scientifically informed technology that increasingly dominates our world is not something fundamentally new or even modern. Rather, it fulfills Western philosophy’s oldest desire for knowledge of what is real as that is expressed in the pre-Socratics, Plato, and Aristotle. For all the specific satisfactions this fulfillment obviously brings, however, Heidegger questions whether it can ever make us feel genuinely “at home.” From the start, he was convinced that a science-driven, technologically informed “understanding of Being” – in other words, our primary, operative sense of what it means for something to be “real” – is increasingly experienced as more constraining than satisfactorily illuminating of our encounters with each other and with our surroundings. In Being and Time, he proposes to raise the Beingquestion “again,” in hopes of opening up our thinking to a less hegemonic and more pluralistic conception of the ways that things can “be.”

After Being and Time, however, Heidegger grew increasingly dissatisfied with several features of his initial way of posing his question. He came to believe that – quite aside from what he himself may have learned in the process – it was misleading to have conceived his inquiry as one that must start with an analysis of specifically “human” Being and then turn to the task of “overcoming” Western metaphysics. In characterizing his intentions this way, Being and Time created the impression that if we would only (1) make our own Being the primary topic and (2) view traditional philosophy as the culprit, then (3) we might somehow achieve a standpoint that is “after,” or radically freed up from, this tradition. On all three counts, however, this impression is wrong. As the later Heidegger sees it in retrospect, neither something about ourselves, nor opposition to traditional metaphysics, nor the dream of a post-traditional philosophy define the direction of his inquiry. Rather, “thinking” must locate itself at and within the “site” or “clearing” where our relationships with things and people take place.

“The Question Concerning Technology” is one of many works in which Heidegger recasts his original project in terms of this “thinking.” As its opening lines show, the discussion begins neither with ourselves nor with technological things but with their relationship. What is it like, Heidegger asks, to be “in the midst” of a technological existence? Presently, typically, we tend to be “chained” to technology; but analysis of precisely this condition can show the way to open up a “free” relationship with technology instead. The analysis has four parts. First, Heidegger distinguishes a “correct” from the “true” understanding of technology. A correct understanding interprets technology the way many readers interpreted Being and Time, that is, in terms of what it is “for us.” Interpreted this way, technology seems obviously to be a human activity that provides the means to our ends. This “instrumentalist” interpretation is not wrong, but it fails to account for its own “uncanny” correctness. Hence, it only opens up a deeper question – namely, what is technology, “essentially,” such that “the instrumental” is already understood to define the very atmosphere in which (or “site” where) means, ends, and the “will to mastery” typically predominate? Second, with this question in mind, Heidegger considers instrumentality in terms of the notion of “for what end(s)?” and – through analyses of the traditional concepts of “cause” and of “technē” as a practical art involving a kind of bringing-forth (poiēsis) – he suggests that with technology comes a distinctive mode of disclosiveness, or revealedness, that is, a kind of ontological truth (alētheia). Third, Heidegger develops the idea that technological truth needs to be treated not just as a disclosure but as a “sent” disclosure. Considered in this way, technological truth can be seen to account for the way we characteristically find ourselves already “put in the midst” of our busy instrumental circumstances. In Being and Time, Heidegger analyzed practical and theoretical being-in-the-world, respectively, in terms of relatively simple tasks and a critique of modern epistemology. In the “Technology” essay, however, he describes these activities in the more specifically contemporary terms of technoscientific practice and theory. Our activities, the things we encounter and deal with, and even we ourselves all seem to happen together in a “world” where everything is set up and “enframed” as part of a stockpile of available materials and personnel – what Heidegger calls a “standing-reserve” (Bestand), always ready for technologically determined purposes. Enframing (Gestell), then, is the “essence” of the technological – essence, not in the traditional sense of a permanent and unchangeable character or set of properties, but in the sense of a predominant way of disclosing meaning which “gives” the instrumentally useful its familiar “instrumental” sense. Heidegger goes on to consider the current hegemony of this gift of disclosure – that is, the way it infuses the world with a pervasive sense of the disposable usefulness of everything so that it tends to hide both other (i.e., non-instrumental) possibilities and also itself as precisely this sent, or occurrent, enframing. Finally, Heidegger urges us to “thoughtfully reflect” upon the “eventuation” (Ereignis) of this enframing instead of “falling away” from it into the ever more frantic pursuit of instrumental means to technoscientifically defined ends. Becoming captive to this pursuit, he says, is the ever-present “danger” of our age. By reflecting upon the very occurrence of enframing, however, we may come to recognize a “saving power” – the other possibility into which enframing places us – namely, the possibility of opening up a “free relation with technology.” Such a relation, he concludes, would be one in which technology is “decisively confronted” and in which technological engagements, no matter how pervasive and compelling, do not close us off from non-instrumental possibilities. Heidegger leaves us with the provocative suggestion that such a relation – one that is not wholly captivated by technoscientific activities but also one that does not fancifully imagine being transported beyond or outside of these activities – would necessarily involve a transformation of the very site where all of this occurs. A free relation with technology would thus have to happen, he says, “in a realm that is, on the one hand, akin to the essence of technology and, on the other, fundamentally different from it.”

The other essays in this section (as well as the Ihde and Verbeek selections in Part VI) each react quite differently to Heidegger’s holistic or “global” interpretation of technology relations as always taking place within an enframing “realm” of available things and personnel.

Robert Scharff argues that, surprisingly, Comte and Heidegger actually share this interpretation. Both regard technoscience as nothing short of the “culmination” of the Western intellectual tradition; and both see themselves as thinking about the essential character of this culmination from within the experienced situation it defines, not from some imagined vantage point outside of it. The question, then, is how to understand their radically different reactions to the increasingly hegemonic reach of technology and science – the implication being, of course, that understanding the difference between Comte and Heidegger might also help illuminate current debates. Scharff suggests that the difference in their reactions is not a function of any disagreements about particular technologies or particular issues in epistemology. The real contrast is between an upbeat (and in some moods even utopian) Comte who is unable to even imagine an era “beyond” the technoscientific and a Heidegger who finds this same era deeply, experientially, and ontologically unsatisfying. Comte conceives the future in a way that anticipates the army of technological optimists of the “developed” world yet to come – namely, in terms of how to encourage more of the same under ever better conditions. Heidegger, however, faces the problem – described in the final pages of “The Question Concerning Technology” and echoed by numerous technological critics and pessimists – of finding a way to think the “enframing” character of technoscience that both acknowledges our inevitably continuing to exist “in the midst” of this event and yet also does justice to all those experiences that do not fit “comfortably” within its enframing sense of what is real.

Some philosophers of technology have expressed a strong preference for Heidegger’s earlier analyses of practical and theoretical relations in Being and Time and reacted with disapproval toward his later thinking, both about technology and almost everything else. For example, phenomenologists and postphenomenologists like Ihde and Verbeek (see Chapters 46 and 47) as well as critical social theorists like Feenberg (below) and Marcuse (see Chapter 38) all argue that Heidegger’s earlier work offers a less reductive and more promising picture of our options in a technological era. They point to Being and Time’s analysis of tool use and “readyto-hand” practical relations which, in comparison to Heidegger’s thinner and more reductive treatment of instrumentality in the “Technology” essay, seems more nuanced and pluralistic. Moreover, to many of these same critics, Heidegger’s later umbrella notion of a standing reserve (of useful material and personnel) seems to reflect a hopelessly dystopian attitude toward the present era.

Albert Borgmann’s “Focal Things and Practices,” is excerpted from his well-known Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life (1986), in which he argues for a “reform of technology” based on an elaboration and correction of Heidegger’s later account. Locating himself between technological determinists like Ellul and instrumentalists who view technology (in Heidegger’s phrase, merely “correctly”) as a collection of neutral means to freely chosen ends (see Mesthene, chapter 56), Borgmann agrees with Heidegger about the danger of modern technology. The world of modern industrial technology does indeed threaten to reduce our relations to the instrumental/utilitarian; and Heidegger is undoubtedly right that only by “raising the rule of technology from its anonymity” (i.e., think the enframing itself ), might we learn to let something extra-technological – what Borgmann, renaming Heidegger’s idea of “things thinging” and “shining forth,” calls “focal things” – enrich and bring greater purpose to our lives.

Borgmann argues, however, that what Heidegger says about such enriching experiences needs to be improved in two directions. First, he rejects Heidegger’s “misleading and dispiriting” tendency to appeal only to “the simple things of yesterday” as potentially enriching. Second, he complains that Heidegger fails to adequately trace out the way focal concerns shape our social relations as well as our relations with things. Borgmann analyzes activities like playing music, running, gardening, and the family meal as at least potentially providing occasions for the sort of “gathering and directing” of our concerns he has in mind. Serious runners, for example, will enhance their activity by using the latest and best gear, but only to the extent that this does not transform the activity itself into something no human runner could accomplish. So, too, the family meal might again become “a focal event par excellence” – that is, an event that brings scattered family members together, provides an occasion for cooperative preparation of carefully chosen foods, for reenacting cultural traditions and social practices, and for the intimate sharing of doubts and pleasures in conversation. Borgmann admits that focal events today are relatively isolated and in constant danger of being overtaken by the press of technological life. Running comes to mean 30 minutes on the treadmill, and meals a quick Big Mac or microwaved frozen dinner, eaten on the fly, with or without company. He insists, moreover, that technology itself has never produced anything which might properly serve as a focal concern. Nevertheless, there is nothing to prevent us from cultivating such concerns, glorying in their plurality, and “celebrating the social union that is fostered by that plurality.” Borgmann even suggests that a reversal of the current priorities of technological practice and focal concern might lead to the development of a new conception of the good life that is directed by focal practices and merely enhanced by technological means.

In their response to Borgmann, Hubert Dreyfus and Charles Spinosa join him in affirming Heidegger’s interpretation of the “danger” inherent in technology, but they object to Borgmann’s further claim that technology itself cannot be a source of focal concerns. The problem, in their view, is Borgmann’s reliance on Heidegger’s earlier rather than later thought. At first, Heidegger understood technology as simply the last, greatest expression of “subjectivity” – that is, of a world full of individual human selves, each treating everything as an “object” of their desires and so as something to be controlled and/or consumed. Acceptance of this view forces Borgmann to conceive all focal concerns in terms of resistance to technological practices and thus to conceive these concerns as necessarily non-technological. For Dreyfus and Spinosa, however, Heidegger’s later notion of developing a “free relation” to technology offers a more positive possibility. In their postmodern construal, which they claim to validate with reference to Heidegger’s own writings, technological practices do indeed tend to fragment, or “disaggregate” our lives so that we lose any sense of our having single, unified self-identities; and the danger is indeed that this disaggregation threatens our ability to “disclose the world” in any way other than instrumentally and arbitrarily. Yet people like Borgmann are wrong to see only danger here. Dreyfus and Spinosa are not convinced – and do not think the later Heidegger still holds – that all disaggregation has to be viewed negatively. They therefore reject the idea that world-disclosing must ultimately be conceived in terms of some overarching personal or communal unity.

In a provocative interpretation of Heidegger’s notion of technological enframing’s “saving power,” they argue that entering into a free relation with technology really means “freeing us from having a total fixed identity so that we may experience ourselves as multiple identities disclosing multiple worlds.” In other words, Dreyfus and Spinosa see a potential benefit to be gained from the technology’s undermining of the notion of a subject-self with a single, unifying self-identity. Living with technology – which we will necessarily be doing in any event – appears to require living in a plurality of local worlds, with a plurality of focal skills, with at most a “poly-identity that is neither the identity of an arbitrary desiring subject nor the rudderless adaptability of a resource.” Dwelling in some of these local worlds, of course, can be expected to be short-lived – but no less enjoyable for that. Dreyfus and Spinosa mention, for example, Web-surfing, “zipping around an autobahn cloverleaf,” and participating in the mercurial creative period of a rock band, with each musician then going his or her own way. As they see it, Heidegger cannot be used to resurrect anything like Borgmann’s old idea of humanity eventually forming a “community of communities.” The only integrity we can expect our lives to have is the openness and flexibility to belong to and move around among many local worlds.

For Andrew Feenberg, neither Borgmann’s Heideggerianism nor the phenomenologies of Ihde or Dreyfus and Spinosa can rescue Heidegger from his own inadequacies; moreover, their interpretations introduce additional problems of their own. Although Feenberg does not specifically mention Ihde or Dreyfus and Spinosa in the essay reprinted here, in his rejection of what he calls “idealist” readings of Heidegger’s analysis he does in fact have views like theirs in mind. If we take Heidegger at his word that the essence of technology can only be understood through our technological engagements with the world, says Feenberg, then the question immediately arises whether this engagement is merely an “attitude” or is “embedded in the actual design of modern technological devices.” If one answers that it is an attitude, then it follows that Heidegger’s so-called “free relation” with technology would amount to nothing more than a change in our outlook that leaves the device-filled world as we find it. In other words, when Heidegger’s defenders say that we are “active world-disclosers,” that we might become more “in tune” with technology, that technology solicits us to change our sense of personal identity, that we might move from one “world” to another by employing different sets of skills – all this language at least creates the impression that they, in spite of their use of Heidegger’s language about the “thinging of things,” understand themselves merely to be recommending the adoption of a new outlook toward those things.

Feenberg is too much opposed to the complacent sociopolitical conclusions that seem implicit in this approach to settle for its “aesthetic” image of how to react toward the present technoscientific hegemony. In recent work – especially in Heidegger and Marcuse (Routledge, 2005) and Between Reason and Experience (MIT, 2010) – Feenberg has been more inclined to accept Heidegger’s diagnosis of our current state of affairs. However, he still ultimately rejects what he sees as a “romantic” (i.e., merely subjectivist and idealist) reaction to this situation in both Heidegger himself and in most of his followers. For him, the problem with this reaction is that even when it involves expressing displeasure over this or that technology, it seems in general so accepting of the idea that technological practice just is the continual improvement of technological devices on the basis of ever better technoscientific theories and an ever more refined conception of instrumentalist praxis that their reaction itself constitutes a form of quietism. As a “critical” reaction to technoscientific optimism, it may indeed effect a change of attitude, but that is all. In the end, they leave us with a kind of technological thinking that is too strongly focused on and deeply engaged with the “actual design of technological devices” to envisage any possibility of a widespread “democratic” political and social transformation of our technological engagements. More of Feenberg’s positive conception of this sort of “democratic rationalization” of technology can be found in Chapter 58 (and in Between Experience and Reason). In the present selection, Feenberg’s critique of Borgmann (and, by implication, Dreyfus and Spinosa) ends with the complaint that his account is typical of Heideggerians in not to address this deeper political issue.

According to Feenberg, the ultimate responsibility for all these difficulties lies in Heidegger’s own flawed way of posing his “question of technology.” Two related criticisms are central to Feenberg’s analysis. First, there is Heidegger’s demand that we consider only the “essence” of technology; second, there is the resultant “abstractness” of Heidegger’s thinking about it. As his analysis of instrumentalization shows, Feenberg interprets “essence” here in a fairly traditional way, as designating the fundamental, universal, unchanging characteristic(s) that define what something is. On the basis of this interpretation, he finds cause to complain that a Heideggerian “substantivist” analysis of technology remains remote from our actual engagements with it, and that from its high altitude, it is forced to merely vacillate between recommending a change of attitude and merely denouncing in very general terms how things are. Either way, Feenberg complains, the whole variety of very real differences in our actual relations with and modifications of technological devices stays out of view. He gives as an extended example the ways in which the production and use of the computer have mutually affected each other, so that it is simply false to imagine that some “inner, techno-logic” was spelling itself out in these devices which we were only able to witness.

Feenberg’s critique of Heidegger is in some ways representative of those influenced by critical social theory and neo-Marxism. Indeed, he actually says at one point that it is to the “requirements of capitalist economics,” not the essence of technology that we should look for an explanation of the hegemony of Gestell. Nevertheless, his concern for technoscientific reform speaks for other critics as well. In the end, for many critics, the main problem with Heidegger’s philosophy of technology is that it leaves us without any concrete sense of either (1) how technoscientific devices actually figure in everyday life or (2) how social and political change in a technological world might actually be achieved. Feenberg does not believe Heidegger’s own characterization of his thinking, where he describes himself as located “in the midst” of technological engagements and yet as also struggling to develop a free relation with technology that would alter the very “realm” in which these engagements take place. Instead, Feenberg thinks that because Heidegger calls this an “ontological” issue and (except for the embarrassment of his own participation in the Nazi movement) refuses to offer a specific (i.e., “ontic”) sociopolitical program, Heidegger’s critique of technology’s dangers – in spite of its insightful identification of the technological excesses of the present era – can only give us the useless advice that we should somehow “liberate” ourselves from our present technological engagements, or else wait for some sort of new God to “save” us (as Heidegger says in a famous newspaper interview, “Only a God Can Save Us”). The question of whether Feenberg’s interpretation of Heidegger is correct – and whether that makes any difference to the concrete question of how technological engagements might be delimited and transformed – has become a central issue in the debates over the importance of Heidegger’s work.

---
*Source: Philosophy of Technology: The Technological Condition: An Anthology, Second Edition. Edited by Robert C. Scharff and Val Dusek. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.*
---