# The Task of a Philosophy of Technology

## Introduction

In spite of the relatively recent emergence of philosophies of technology, an impressive diversity of approaches has already developed. In general, one can at least say that, not surprisingly, analytic philosophies of technology tend to reflect the characteristics of the predominantly empiricistpositivist tradition they inherit. Hence, for example, given this tradition’s well-established suspicion of speculative systems and extra-scientific claims, its philosophers of technology tend to look first toward actual or real-world technological issues and problems and to eschew evaluations of anything like technology “as such.” Also, given their tradition’s preference for scientific, or at least science-like, models of knowledge, analytic philosophers of technology usually take the scientific basis of modern technology for granted and concentrate on the engineering know-how and ethical application of scientific knowledge in technology and by technologists. Continental philosophies of technology, on the other hand, tend to reflect their tradition’s longstanding suspicion of Enlightenment conceptions of reason and of the scientistic and utopian attitude toward technology that often accompanies these conceptions. As a result, Continental philosophies of technology frequently display considerable tolerance for holistic and extrascientific evaluations of technological phenomena (e.g., Mumford, Ellul, and especially Heidegger for the former, social studies of science for the latter), and they rarely make a point of sharply distinguishing questions concerning what technology is (i.e., with respect to its logic and allegedly “essential” structure) and questions about its value and valuation. All of these generalizations, however, are fairly high-level abstractions, and none of them capture adequately the plurality of actual positions. Moreover, in recent years some philosophers have complained that the very classification “analytic vs. continental” is no longer as informative as it once was. There is certainly some truth to this, although mostly at the level of explicit beliefs and doctrines once held and now discarded (e.g., formalism in epistemology, an exclusive focus on the verification of theories rather than their discovery), not regarding fundamental philosophical orientations, where significant differences remain. Then, too, most of complainants sympathize with the analytic tradition that has been dominant in North America and Great Britain since the 1940s. Finally, however, as the following selections make plain, many current approaches to the philosophy of technology (e.g., those inspired by historical and social studies of science, recent feminism, or classical pragmatism) cannot easily be classified as analytic or Continental.

Analytical philosophy of technology is exemplified by the selections from Mario Bunge and Maarten Franssen. Bunge, a former physicist whose writings reveal a substantial commitment to general systems theory, was a vocal participant in the so-called “science wars” alluded to in the previous section. He is a passionate opponent of Romanticism and of anti-technological attitudes in philosophy generally, and a severe critic of social constructivist and hermeneutical approaches to technology specifically. In order to show that technology, when properly conceptualized, is not by nature “soulless, aphilosophical, or even antithetical to philosophy,” Bunge describes the relations between technology and philosophy in terms of inputs and outputs (which is itself, of course, a technology-influenced terminology). On the output side, he notes that technology supplies system-theoretical ontologies (i.e., conceptual systems of the nature of scientifically knowable objects like the one Bunge himself produced in a multi-volume treatise). Technology, he adds, has also, and less fortunately, given us the philosophy of pragmatism. As a disciple of Karl Popper, Bunge is critical of pragmatism, at least as he understands it, but he admits it is obviously one of the major philosophies of the modern world. (For a much more subtle and favorable estimation of pragmatism, see Heelen and Schulkin, Chapter 12, and Hickman, Chapter 34.)

Franssen’s essay presents a clear summary of the approach to technology one should expect in analytic philosophy. A few of its main features are identified at the outset, namely, its “abhorrence of system-building and speculation,” its preference for inquiry regarding “clearly delineated problems,” and a respect for science so profound that philosophy and science might best be viewed as merging, or at least as forming “in some sense a continuum.” Unsurprisingly, then, the preferred model for philosophical inquiry is philosophy of science – both because the analysis of “knowledge and theories” is its primary focus, and because scientific theories are the primary source of knowledge. As Franssen rightly notes, analytic philosophy has only recently taken a professional interest in technology, but in some respects his explanation for this is similar to those given by other traditions which also had to explain being latecomers to the topic, only a bit earlier. He mentions, for example, the ubiquitous modern habit of understanding technology as applied science, which makes scientific knowledge and ethical choice interesting, but reduces technology to the merely neutral means for tying the latter to the former.

What is different about Franssen’s explanation for analytic philosophy’s late but now growing interest in technology is that he mostly attributes it, not (as other traditions have) to the disquiet of recent technological experience or the unavoidable implications of historical and social scientific research or sociopolitical critiques of technoscientific life, but to the characteristics of analytic philosophy itself. The fact is, he says, analytic philosophers dislike not only large-scale theorizing but non-scientific epistemologies (e.g., Ryle’s conceptually loose “knowing-how vs. knowing-that” dichotomy), so that it wasn’t until some analytic philosophers began to see how thoroughly different technical engineering knowledge is from the purely scientific that there was something “about technology specifically for philosophers to inquire about.”

Franssen goes on to list some aspects of technological practice to which analytic philosophy has recently turned, including questions of the fundamental difference between scientifically substantive and technically operative theorizing (Bunge), the special nature of technical action, the “status of artifacts” and their functions, and meta-ethical issues about the social and political problems associated with technology. In general, Franssen does not see technology as presenting any “special challenges,” even in relation to ethics. Analytic philosophy, he says, will treat technology in a way that “reflects [its] general orientation.” This last phrase encapsulates the general approach that Franssen describes. In a voice that still echoes the older empiricist-positivist tradition, he portrays analytic philosophy as heir to “a way of doing philosophy” that defends a science-based model of clarity and precision for both natural knowledge and the rules of right action, and that stands as a deflationary guardian against all extravagant generalizations about reality and human life. It will now simply extend its outlook to include technology and treat the issues it finds there within the general framework of its established array of specializations – namely, analytic epistemology (What is technological “knowledge”?), metaphysics (What are technological “objects”?), philosophy of language (How does the “logic of propositions and judgments” apply to technology-related activity?), action theory (What is the structure and function of engineering design and artifactual use?), and meta-ethics (What, if anything, is distinctive about ethical judgments and propositions that involve technology?). One other striking feature of analytic philosophy thus characterized is its complete lack of reference to any of the other recent approaches to technology studies. For example, Franssen agrees that philosophers must “address” ethical and societal problems, but he simply asserts that the appropriate way for analytic philosophy to do so is to do what it always does, namely, clarify basic concepts, stress that “sensible” solutions must rest on empirical knowledge of the production and use of artifacts, and insist that all the ground-level terms typically used by those who make “sweeping claims” about technology and the good life (e.g., freedom, culture, thought, human being) be analyzed and made precise before we decide whether they can be “meaningfully proposed and discussed.”

In the selections from various introductory notes to his famous The Technological Society, Jacques Ellul makes it plain that his approach to technology does not proceed by way of empirical descriptions of technological problems, techniques, and practitioners. Indeed, almost as if he were replying to Franssen, he suggests that such an approach will never arrive at an adequate conception of what technology is and how it functions. Only a characterization of “the real nature of the technological phenomenon” as a whole can shed light on its actual and pervasive – and, he thinks, also fundamentally dangerous – effect in the contemporary world. One especially provocative aspect of Ellul’s approach, however, is that although it clearly exemplifies the global, or holistic, outlook one expects from Continental philosophers, he explicitly denies that this makes it either speculative or evaluative. His approach, he insists, is entirely “descriptive.” Not only does he claim to deliberately avoid offering ethical and aesthetic evaluations of technology, he accuses those who interpret him as promoting a negative or pessimistic picture of technology as simply reacting out of their own prior (and extra-descriptive, “metaphysical”) value commitments. Moreover, he argues that, when critics accuse him of going beyond mere description in referring to “technology” as if it were a real phenomenon instead of, at best, a sociological abstraction, they simply reveal their commitment (common especially among non-Continental philosophers but also actor network theorists like Latour) to methodological individualism. “Describing” technology philosophically cannot mean just observing individuals and their practices. Society is not a mere sum of the actions of individuals; it has a collective reality. Without a proper account of the extra-individual character of the technological phenomenon, we will never understand its “deterministic” power in contemporary life, and we will continue to underestimate the extent to which we are currently deprived of our freedom by it.

In his essay, Hans Jonas resembles Ellul in presenting an unabashedly holistic account of the irreversibility and inevitability of technological change; but unlike Ellul, he combines this account with an appeal for us to shoulder the “cosmic task” of establishing ethical imperatives responsive to this change. Jonas distinguishes between the “formal dynamics” and the “substantive content” of technology. Formally, he argues, modern technology differs from premodern technology insofar as the former was “an enterprise and process,” where the latter is more of “a possession and a state.” Like Lynn White (see Chapter 44), Jonas stresses the fact that because modern technology is driven by consciously developed plans and ideas, its innovations tend to build upon one another sequentially and spread rapidly across the globe. In this way, a concept of technology as involving genuine progress – a concept in which invention and change are understood as bringing about conditions of life that are superior to those of the present or past – replaces the older idea of using technology to reach an accommodation with a static and stable natural order. Today, observes Jonas, the traditional, premodern “unilinear” idea of knowable but fixed ends and accommodating means, according to which good theory always precedes successful practice, has been replaced by a “circular” one. Science and technology have become inseparably intertwined (cf. Latour and the postphenomenologists’ insistence on the term “technoscience”), and technological innovation is now just as likely to suggest new goals as do advances in scientific knowledge. Jonas sees the inherent “restlessness” of modern science and technology as leading to the disastrous situation in which the sheer process of production and alteration of objects and objectives itself becomes the end of life, thus threatening any substantial and extra-technoscientific idea of what we are like and what life is for. Hence, our most urgent philosophical need is for an ethics of averting disaster – an ethics that encourages a world in which diverse images of humanity and the quality of life legitimately contend, and people in power are as little beholden as possible to the interests generated by technology. Yet we must ask, says Jonas, echoing the problem Plato’s philosopher king faces in the Republic, Book 7 (see Chapter 1), what the role of the philosopher can be in such a world, and we must consider the inevitable compromises that a well-meaning person will have to make in order to be effectively involved in public policymaking.

Finally, in Wendy Faulkner’s essay, we see how radically the insertion of wider, extra-epistemological issues into the conversation has changed the traditional positivist landscape for the philosophy of technology as much as the philosophy of science. She acknowledges that too much feminist research still tends to succumb to the common tendency to view technology either too optimistically (i.e., as merely neutral and so in itself culturally and politically unthreatening) or too pessimistically (i.e., as intrusive, hopelessly gender-biased, even “deterministically patriarchal” and capitalistic). Faulkner’s version of an increasingly popular third way – identified here as “feminist technology studies” (indicating her indebtedness to social constructivist accounts of science) – begins with the question, “How is technology gendered?” and seeks to determine not just why technology is so typically linked to men and maleness, but also why this link is so “tenaciously” maintained and how it might nevertheless be undermined. By focusing on the “co-production” of technology and gender, rather than mistakenly assuming one must give some sort of explanatory account that identifies which one is most responsible for the condition of the other, Faulkner draws liberally on recent research, especially on engineering practices, to show how masculinity tends to be linked with technical skill, as well as with the meaning and use of artifacts, the very language of everyday practice, and even (at least for some men) gender identity. However, her aim is not just to stress the fact of these linkages but to demonstrate through the details that they are far less uniform and intractable than a more detached and abstract (including some social constructivist?) account of technoscientific practice might lead us to expect. She argues that once we pay attention to all the “mismatches” between the image of maleness and the particular practices associated with it (e.g., it turns out that “the pleasures of engineering” are neither universally nor uniquely the experience of men), it becomes obvious that we must understand the gender–technology relation as a “co-production,” and thus less determined than a cause-and-effect explanatory account makes it seem.

Faulkner’s essay is not, however, entirely descriptive. The recognition that the relation between masculinity and technology is co-produced rather than determined gives us cause to look with fresh eyes at the ambivalence that many women have about technology. Certainly it is a relief to avoid the traditional forced option between either uncritically endorsing the present arrangements and trying to make the best of it or practicing outright rebellion against current technoscientific existence. But then what course of action might realistically be available instead? Faulkner concludes with a seven-point summary of her answer to her original question of how technology is gendered, and then argues that all seven points taken together suggest what she provocatively calls (following Donna Haraway; see Chapter 51) the possibility of a “cyborgian” middle course. Of course, she says, this obviously means active engagement with technology, beginning with a sharpened recognition of how we are already inescapably enmeshed in a socially constructed technoscientific existence, but it is an engagement newly empowered by the understanding that whatever is constructed can also be “destabilized.” For example, if the male dominance of engineering does in fact “gender” the design of today’s artifacts, why not the other way around? Her concluding lines, however, highlight both what her essay accomplishes and what it is left open for coverage in other selections in this anthology. Increased engagement with technology, she concludes, will not amount to much “unless it is linked to a radical vision and agenda for the transformation of technology – into a practice that is more democratic and respectful of diversity, with products which are safer, friendlier, and more useful.” Yet as she herself demonstrates, the cultural “tenacity” with which the equation between masculinity and technology is maintained seems everywhere remarkably immune to even the best empirical evidence of its “fractured and contradictory” condition. Where, then, will “radical visions … for transformation” get their power?

---
*Source: Philosophy of Technology: The Technological Condition: An Anthology, Second Edition. Edited by Robert C. Scharff and Val Dusek. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.*
---